[Amit Varma]: One of the common certitudes of our species is that we know the world that we live in.
[Amit Varma]: I would argue that not only do we not know it, we don't even see it.
[Amit Varma]: All of us exist in a bubble of our own, surrounded by infinite invisible worlds.
[Amit Varma]: If we are in a car in a traffic jam, the beggar at the signal or the hawkers on the pavement
[Amit Varma]: may be invisible to us, the waiters at the restaurants we dine at, the domestic help
[Amit Varma]: around us, the building watchmen, all invisible.
[Amit Varma]: If we are men, we do not see the extra layer of awareness all women carry, such as when
[Amit Varma]: a stranger walks in their direction on the footpath or when they enter a lift filled
[Amit Varma]: with other people.
[Amit Varma]: The exact construction of our bubble changes from moment to moment, but there are always
[Amit Varma]: things we do not see, and often things we choose not to see.
[Amit Varma]: Defining ourselves by identities of happenstance, we divide the world into categories based
[Amit Varma]: on class, religion, caste, gender, nationality, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: We wear these identities like straight jackets, restricting ourselves and the better angels
[Amit Varma]: of our nature.
[Amit Varma]: But one thing that can temporarily make us forget these barriers we have built is art.
[Amit Varma]: We can all be transported by a beautiful image or get lost in a piece of music, and then
[Amit Varma]: the divisions between us don't matter.
[Amit Varma]: But even that art may be shaped by those divisions.
[Amit Varma]: And in any case, when the music stops, we are back to being our narrow parochial selves.
[Amit Varma]: It is a rare artist who, even after the song is over, can continue to peel back the layers
[Amit Varma]: of the unseen.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a remarkable TM Krishna, who is not just a legend of the Carnatic music
[Amit Varma]: world, but also a fearless public intellectual who has spoken out repeatedly over the years
[Amit Varma]: against the very structures of power that he himself benefited from, the orthodoxies
[Amit Varma]: of Brahmanism and patriarchy.
[Amit Varma]: TM has written numerous books, most recently Sebastian and Sons, and is arguably one of
[Amit Varma]: India's most powerful voices today, in the context of his art, an uplifting voice, and
[Amit Varma]: in the context of his politics, a discordant voice.
[Amit Varma]: And honestly, in these times, we need both.
[Amit Varma]: Before I begin my conversation with him, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you're listening to The Scene and the Unseen, it means you like listening to audio and you're
[Amit Varma]: thirsty for knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: That being the case, I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors of this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform that has a massive range of audiobooks from around
[Amit Varma]: the world.
[Amit Varma]: Their international collection is stellar, but so is a local collection.
[Amit Varma]: They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audiobooks.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I
[Amit Varma]: talk about one book every week, giving context, giving you a taste of it, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Download that app and listen to my show.
[Amit Varma]: And as long as Storytel sponsors this show within this commercial itself, I will recommend
[Amit Varma]: an audiobook that I liked on that platform every week.
[Amit Varma]: My recommendation for this week is The Complete Sherlock Holmes.
[Amit Varma]: This is comfort food for me, whether I read it or listen to it, which you now can on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: The Complete Sherlock Holmes by Arthur Conan Doyle.
[Amit Varma]: Download the Storytel app or visit Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Remember that Storytel with a single L. Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: TM, welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely to be here, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, you know, before we start talking about your book or about your music or about
[Amit Varma]: your politics, let's kind of go back to how you started as a musician, like you were a
[Amit Varma]: bit of a child prodigy, weren't you?
[Amit Varma]: I like the word prodigy.
[Guest]: So, you know, my home was a home of Carnatic music, definitely, of Bharatanatyam, all these
[Guest]: arts.
[Guest]: But we are a business family.
[Guest]: My dad was a business person.
[Guest]: So we're not a family of musicians like we usually hear about in India.
[Guest]: But at the age of four or five, apparently I showed some talent, I used to hum the tunes
[Guest]: my mother used to sing.
[Guest]: My mother herself was a trained vocalist, not on the professional stage, but she was
[Guest]: formally trained.
[Guest]: She did a graduation in music, actually, a post graduation in English.
[Guest]: So so what happened was, I mean, I started singing when I was about five or six, formally.
[Guest]: I never wanted to be a musician.
[Guest]: You know, I grew up playing cricket on the streets, hated the music class thrice a week.
[Guest]: Me, I'm a left hand batsman, I'm very proud of the fact that I'm a left hand batsman.
[Guest]: So presumed that I'm naturally elegant, basically.
[Guest]: So so I loved it.
[Guest]: I used to love to sing.
[Guest]: There's one thing I never felt any inhibition.
[Guest]: I know that you go to anybody's home and they say sing a song, I would just belt it out.
[Guest]: So that was one thing I was I was quite fearless about singing.
[Guest]: But I never thought I'd be a musician.
[Guest]: You know, I got to school, 10th grader, I was economics, I want to be an economist.
[Guest]: And that was my big dream.
[Amit Varma]: My God, you could have been on the show talking about something else entirely.
[Guest]: How horrible the show would have been.
[Guest]: So I must tell you what Amartya Sen told me when I told him, he said, thank God.
[Guest]: He feared the competition would go down.
[Guest]: I couldn't have tolerated another economist in the world, probably.
[Guest]: But you know, I want to be an economist.
[Guest]: And I had this whole plan in my head, you know, Delhi School, LSE, as if they're going
[Guest]: to call me and invite me.
[Guest]: But anyway.
[Guest]: But I started performing when I was about 12, my first concert was when I was 12.
[Guest]: And you know, people thought I was talented.
[Guest]: And yes, he has a bright big voice, young guy sings without any fear.
[Guest]: All that was there.
[Guest]: And I was within the world of Carnatic music.
[Guest]: And I was within the power structures, my, you know, my uncle was the president of the
[Guest]: Music Academy in Chennai, which is like one of the premier institutions.
[Guest]: And you descended from T.D. Krishnamachari, you actually started the academy.
[Guest]: Yes, T.D. Krishnamachari is one of the founders, and he is my grand uncle.
[Guest]: So yeah, so I come from within the power structures of high art, whatever that is.
[Guest]: And therefore, even so, then I started taking it more seriously.
[Guest]: And I think it was about 92, 91, when I had a series of concerts, and I remember a lot
[Guest]: of senior musicians and colleagues, young people coming and telling me, you should take
[Guest]: this seriously, what are you doing?
[Guest]: That's when it struck me that, okay, maybe this is something I should be doing.
[Amit Varma]: And you're like 15, 16.
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm just getting into college.
[Guest]: And when I went into college, my undergrads in economics, of course, and by the second
[Guest]: year, I was singing concerts a bit here and there.
[Guest]: And people said, okay, there's this kid who can, you know, sing, I had to make a choice
[Guest]: whether it's music or whether it is economics.
[Guest]: And, you know, I come from all the privileges in the world, I looked, I went to my dad and
[Guest]: said, I want, he said, do what you want, and I'll support you.
[Guest]: That's when I took the plunge to become a singer.
[Guest]: And then things just kind of rolled, opportunities came by.
[Guest]: There was this association formed in 1985 called Youth Association for Classical Music.
[Guest]: It's very interesting that young people who are interested in Carnatic music formed this
[Guest]: organization because in the 80s, there was this whole thing that Carnatic music is dying.
[Guest]: It's all old people stuff.
[Guest]: There are no young people singing, no young people listening.
[Guest]: What do we do?
[Guest]: The truth of the way young people who are willing to sing, they never got opportunities.
[Guest]: You know, in India, the grayer you get, the more intelligent you're presumed or more talented
[Guest]: you're presumed.
[Guest]: And so these guys did something quite remarkable for its time.
[Guest]: They said, you know what, we will organize concerts only for young people below the age
[Guest]: of 30.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: And those were days when there were no sponsorships.
[Guest]: So for the first time, they went to corporates and got like 500 rupees, 1000.
[Guest]: So I became a member there later.
[Guest]: And then all that.
[Guest]: So we had a community where you could talk about a raga and a thala, which is not a cool
[Guest]: thing to do in school, right?
[Guest]: But I think all that was part of growing up for me and my interest in jamming with people,
[Guest]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a lot of fun, I must say.
[Amit Varma]: And there seem to be have been two other journeys you've been on.
[Amit Varma]: One, of course, as a scholar, where you've all studied the history of the music and kind
[Amit Varma]: of looked at all of that, a scholar-cum-historian, so to say.
[Amit Varma]: And two, of course, there's politics.
[Amit Varma]: How did these two sort of evolve?
[Amit Varma]: Like, initially, like, you know, you said you were going to be an economist and then,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you decided that, fine, these concerts are being received well.
[Amit Varma]: So was it partly that the concerts are being received well, or did you just love the music
[Amit Varma]: enough to say, this is what I want to do and nothing else?
[Amit Varma]: Come on, it's both.
[Amit Varma]: It's a bit of both.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, you love the stage.
[Amit Varma]: You love the applause.
[Amit Varma]: And when is the tendency towards, A, the scholarship, figuring out what the history of this is and
[Amit Varma]: figuring out what is behind all of this come from?
[Amit Varma]: And B, is that what then led to the politics?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, most of this is like, post facto kind of understanding how the movement took
[Guest]: place.
[Guest]: Because honestly, I think many of these moments just take place, and you're in the flow of
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And it's, I don't believe it's ever a moment.
[Guest]: I think the moment we talk about is a moment when you realize it.
[Guest]: It's already happening in its background.
[Guest]: So I think it's, it starts with my home and my school.
[Guest]: In terms of how I grew up in, at home and school, there was nothing that was taboo.
[Guest]: You could talk about anything, you could ask any question.
[Guest]: And so there was this definitely Catholicity at home and open speaking.
[Guest]: My school was a school that came from J. Krishnamurti's philosophy, where it was about asking questions.
[Guest]: So you know, even the notion of how does one ask a question?
[Guest]: What is the question?
[Guest]: You know, those are things discussed in school, you know.
[Guest]: So I think that plays, these two places play a very important role in what happened to
[Guest]: me later, because they kept me open, they kept me in check.
[Guest]: And see, once I started performing, and opportunities came by, I mean, it's a drug.
[Guest]: It's like being high always.
[Guest]: I mean, when somebody comes, you know, whether you're young or, you know, someone says that
[Guest]: you're like incredible, I mean, you have incredible talent.
[Guest]: And they keep telling you that you just love it, you love the audience.
[Guest]: In fact, if the applause is not enough, it bothers you.
[Guest]: And then as a musician, you will do something to get that thunderous applause.
[Guest]: And I always tell my students, you know, when do you really practice, for example, you know,
[Guest]: we say sadhana and all that, riyaz, whatever.
[Guest]: The truth is most of the times when we are practicing at home, we hear the applause.
[Guest]: Really?
[Guest]: Yeah, of course.
[Guest]: So it's fascinating how it works, like you're singing at home, and you finished a phrase,
[Guest]: and you can actually hear it in your head, because you're dreaming of it the next day
[Guest]: on stage.
[Guest]: So can you cut yourself off that and actually really practice?
[Guest]: These are all very interesting challenges that I think artists go through.
[Guest]: And so I went through this, I was extremely ambitious guy who just want to be at the top.
[Guest]: My wife will vouch for my ambitiousness and my cutthroatness.
[Guest]: So I want to say this, because it's not like, you know, I've always been like this and asking
[Guest]: these questions.
[Guest]: No, I've had this whole right where I just didn't care a shit, that's the truth.
[Guest]: But I think what happened after a while is I kind of figured out how to be successful
[Guest]: as an artist.
[Guest]: And that's can be a good feeling and a bad feeling.
[Guest]: The good feeling is because you can then belt out successful concerts, you know what you
[Guest]: need to add to your repertoire, add to your skill set to keep moving ahead.
[Guest]: But then I think something happened missing, is this all this is about?
[Guest]: You know, is this all music is about?
[Guest]: I mean, is it just the fact that I can please X number of people, I know how to please them
[Guest]: again and again and again, I'm going to do this all my life.
[Guest]: So I loved it.
[Guest]: But that question did come up in my head.
[Guest]: And I think that's when I started diving into history.
[Guest]: So you know, even questions like, you know, what was music like 100 years ago?
[Guest]: What was it like 150 years ago?
[Guest]: Was it different?
[Guest]: And once I started doing that, and I did some research and we did some archival work, I
[Guest]: was in for a shock.
[Guest]: And around what time?
[Guest]: It was about 2002, 2003.
[Guest]: Around that period of time.
[Amit Varma]: So you're about 26, 27 at this time.
[Guest]: And then we started doing this research and this archival work and this reading up, I
[Guest]: started reading treatises.
[Guest]: I started bothering scholars with questions on Sanskrit on what does this word mean in
[Guest]: this in Natya Shastra, it's in Brihadeshi, what does this mean in Matanga, I said this,
[Guest]: you know, all these crazy things.
[Guest]: And I spent a lot of time trying to understand it with my limited abilities.
[Guest]: I did.
[Guest]: I think that's when a lot of things hit me, you know, about history, about everything
[Guest]: being old, that we are somewhere continuing something that was preciously given to us
[Guest]: 2000 years ago.
[Guest]: All these things became question marks for me, first musically, had nothing to do with
[Guest]: society or politics, just aesthetically.
[Guest]: So what is this I'm carrying forward, you know, Amit, you know, I believe I'm a carrier
[Guest]: of Indian culture.
[Guest]: You know, especially if you're in the classical world, you believe somehow you represent this
[Guest]: incredible idea of India.
[Guest]: And this has been sold by us to the world over for the last 70 odd years.
[Guest]: So what am I really selling?
[Guest]: You are selling something, let's be very brutally honest, this is not some pristine thing that
[Guest]: you're putting, you're selling it.
[Guest]: So what am I selling?
[Guest]: Do I mean, and I believe it.
[Guest]: So what am I holding on to?
[Guest]: What are these notions of this antiquity, the sense of purity, sense of something that's
[Guest]: unchanged, that, you know, people just handed over like this precious ceramic piece of art
[Guest]: that you can't even crack or modify.
[Guest]: So all these questions started appearing and then some of the things that I thought that
[Guest]: music was like, I thought today if somebody sang like that, it would sound horrible.
[Guest]: So I'm like, so what is beautiful?
[Guest]: You know, we look at certain colors, certain designs, and we say, that's Indian beauty.
[Guest]: But what is that?
[Guest]: What construction is that?
[Guest]: So I think all this started, the moment this started, within a few years, and I can tell
[Guest]: you that I never wrote a book for a long time.
[Guest]: You know, I was just doing this because I have an OCD, I get obsessive on something,
[Guest]: I'll just keep doing it.
[Guest]: So I just kept doing it.
[Guest]: And I was not doing a PhD or anything, I was just doing it because I was just fascinated
[Guest]: by what was happening to me and to my understanding and learning.
[Amit Varma]: And did it sort of help that this is also the time when the internet is taking off,
[Amit Varma]: so you have a lot of sources online or you didn't have so many then?
[Guest]: I, well, early 2000, not so much.
[Guest]: But I think through the years, it did help.
[Guest]: But a lot of my sources then were actually the texts and actually scholars, I used to
[Guest]: go call them at 10 o'clock in the night, spend one hour talking to them.
[Guest]: They were very kind people, putting up with this young guy who was asking this question
[Guest]: who knew nothing.
[Guest]: You know, but the first impact of all this happened in the way I was singing.
[Guest]: And I, very naturally, I started fiddling around with the idea of the performance.
[Guest]: Every art practice has a performative, a form.
[Guest]: And we should realize that the form is a reflection of the art, right?
[Guest]: But after a point of time, that performative becomes the solidified notion of the art,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So slowly, I started playing with the performative, you know, because I felt, you know, if it's
[Guest]: all just about the way I design something and offer it package and give it to you, then
[Guest]: it's just so simple.
[Guest]: It can't be.
[Guest]: So that was a moment when I started, my music started changing.
[Guest]: I didn't notice it.
[Guest]: I didn't notice it was changing.
[Guest]: The audience didn't notice it.
[Guest]: They didn't see anything radical.
[Guest]: I had not like made a big shift for a long time.
[Guest]: But after a point, I knew I was listening differently, you know, I was, I was looking
[Guest]: at a concert differently.
[Guest]: So that's where it began.
[Guest]: But the moment all this happens, I think you're also asking questions of society, of people
[Guest]: who's singing this, you know, who was singing it.
[Guest]: When they sang it, how did it sound?
[Guest]: So when you ask these questions, then you're automatically asking political questions.
[Guest]: And first of all, you're asking these questions of yourself.
[Guest]: So I must tell you that it is not like these ideas of caste or anything were in my any
[Guest]: part of the horizon for a long time.
[Guest]: It is a word I never used in my life.
[Guest]: You know, it is even in the most democratic, open home of mine, caste was never discussed.
[Guest]: That's the fact.
[Guest]: It came only because of this kind of confusions and all these struggles that were happening.
[Guest]: And that's when identity became gender, all these questions started appearing in my view.
[Amit Varma]: And people often have the view that in contrast with other kinds of music, and I'm sort of
[Amit Varma]: I don't know Carnatic music very well.
[Amit Varma]: So the listeners and you will have to forgive me if I say something hopelessly naive.
[Amit Varma]: But it's often looked at as something that is very rigid, and that has become ossified
[Amit Varma]: through the years.
[Amit Varma]: Is that rigidity also a consequence of what's happening in in the background socially?
[Guest]: Okay, first of all, like burst the bubble of Hindustani musicians, they are also ossified
[Guest]: and rigid.
[Guest]: It's just a notion of rigidity and ossification is different.
[Guest]: Okay, so I have to put it out there.
[Guest]: So the point is, I think it's true.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So without going into the idea of rigidity and what it means, I think there is definitely
[Guest]: this, it becomes crusty, no doubt, whether it is Hindustani music, or that's also because
[Guest]: of what we think it represents, I think that's a very important aspect we should think about.
[Guest]: Why is it ossified?
[Guest]: Why is it crusty?
[Guest]: Because we believe that in that form, it symbolizes something.
[Guest]: And we're more interested in the symbol than the art.
[Guest]: That's the point of the performative.
[Guest]: So the performative becomes the symbol of identifying something about India, something
[Guest]: about our sound, Nada, you know, all these notions, and you know, whether you believe
[Guest]: in it or not, is a different issue altogether.
[Guest]: So we want that symbol to remain.
[Guest]: And we believe that any movement there kind of demolishes the symbol, and we've created
[Guest]: this symbol.
[Guest]: And there's no doubt that all that has played a role in keeping something unquestioned.
[Guest]: And I want to say something, people may say that no, no, no, but certain things have changed
[Guest]: in the last 60 years, neither Kerala, neither Carnatic music is the same, true.
[Guest]: So the question is, what do you allow to be questioned?
[Guest]: What don't you allow to be questioned?
[Guest]: That's society does brilliantly, right?
[Guest]: We know what can change, I can probably change a raga, I can introduce a new raga, I can
[Guest]: do something, all these are surface level operations, right?
[Guest]: Because after a point, a musician should be able to do this.
[Guest]: But then what about the fundamentals of what the music itself represents?
[Guest]: What are the non-negotiables in your, in your idea of the music?
[Guest]: You ask those questions, those are political questions, and those questions will never
[Guest]: be asked, especially of the so-called classical, I call them the so-called classicals, because
[Guest]: you believe that you are the moral, ethical, aesthetic identity of what is Indian culture.
[Guest]: Everything else plays around.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, so when you start figuring this stuff out, like one, I think it's almost then,
[Amit Varma]: if I read it correctly, an act of rebellion and changing the music itself, because that
[Amit Varma]: itself is a political statement, by changing the way you perform, you're questioning the
[Amit Varma]: sort of existing structures.
[Amit Varma]: But what it also strikes me is that what must be very difficult about figuring out the politics
[Amit Varma]: behind all of it, how these entrenched caste structures have played a part, the damage
[Amit Varma]: that they've done to society in general, the privileging of the classical over the non-classical,
[Amit Varma]: all of this, you're also questioning yourself and your own place, because you are a product
[Amit Varma]: of all this privilege.
[Amit Varma]: You are at the centre of it, you are this.
[Amit Varma]: How hard was that process, like, it must be so tempting to say, you know, everything has
[Amit Varma]: its own place.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just, you know, art is by itself.
[Amit Varma]: And all of this doesn't matter.
[Guest]: And, you know, well, it was very difficult, especially in the beginning, because there
[Guest]: was a time period when I was worried I will lose the music.
[Guest]: Because my question was, if everything is so political, if everything is so entrenched
[Guest]: in ugliness of sorts, then is there anything to this at all?
[Guest]: You know, should I be saying aha, or is saying aha itself an act of violence, for example,
[Guest]: in the sense that am I saying aha, because I am doing that out of habituation of reiteration
[Guest]: of identities, or is the aha beyond that?
[Guest]: You know, you can't really say, honestly, you can't really say.
[Guest]: So there was a point I was saying, suppose after this whole exercise, I don't feel the
[Guest]: music anymore.
[Guest]: What do I do?
[Guest]: And that was very real.
[Guest]: That feeling, that fear was real, because I knew if I push honestly, I could get to
[Guest]: a point where everything in this music sounds ugly to me.
[Guest]: Because I believe I've said everything is social, everything is political, everything
[Guest]: is discriminative.
[Guest]: So the whole thing is then collapses, right, in my own emotional and psychological world.
[Guest]: That fear I did have.
[Guest]: Were there moments when it happened?
[Guest]: No, I think what's what saved me if you want to use that expression, I won't use that expression,
[Guest]: is that there were moments in the music still, where I believed that that sound somehow at
[Guest]: least temporarily made me see the ugliness with greater clarity.
[Guest]: So I said, okay, maybe it could be Amit that I'm creating this whole thing.
[Guest]: Okay, what I'm telling you right now, it could be, I'm not a psychologist, I'm not a person
[Guest]: who can judge that.
[Guest]: But there were moments when I said, the clarity with which I could see the ugliness because
[Guest]: I was singing, or I was listening to the music, I was not having a discourse, I'm just singing,
[Guest]: I'm singing a raga, and then pop for about five minutes, there is greater clarity.
[Guest]: I said, okay, if the sound can give me that, maybe there is some truth to it.
[Guest]: Maybe there is something that is truth to art, that it can really move across it.
[Guest]: But we can't hold on to it.
[Guest]: There is something that drags us back into who we are.
[Guest]: So that's what gave me hope that, okay, I can still sing, I can still feel, and I can
[Guest]: still say I'm ugly.
[Guest]: So what I thought was a contradiction, then moved away from becoming a contradiction became
[Guest]: more real, that these things always exist together, the profound and the profane are
[Guest]: not opposites.
[Guest]: They are constantly with each other.
[Guest]: And they're truly real, when in a way, you feel both.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean, this question about art is also something that I think is alive in other contexts,
[Amit Varma]: like is art something separate from itself from A, the social structures and the politics
[Amit Varma]: that have led to it and from B, from the artist, because more and more we find that we look
[Amit Varma]: back upon time and we say that, all right, these artists were accused of me too, should
[Amit Varma]: we read their books, or these artists were, you know, assaulters, or, you know, Neruda
[Amit Varma]: raped someone when he was whatever, should we read their work?
[Amit Varma]: And that becomes sort of a big question on the one hand, it seems to me that at this
[Amit Varma]: moment in time, if you sing a couple of notes, and it moves me in a particular way, my being
[Amit Varma]: moved by just the sound is something that is surely independent of where it is coming
[Amit Varma]: from.
[Amit Varma]: So that art, that music per se stands apart.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, it's kind of, I mean, do you agree that it stands apart or do you
[Amit Varma]: think that?
[Guest]: I'll try and answer in two parts.
[Guest]: So this notion of art for art's sake, you know, it's a very well used cliche.
[Guest]: My problem with that, that construction is somehow inside that construction is a disassociation
[Guest]: with reality.
[Guest]: That somehow with this bubble floating at 7000 meters up there, and we're all looking
[Guest]: at it in wonderment.
[Guest]: But I'm saying suppose you redefine art in that statement and say art is reality with
[Guest]: all its layers.
[Guest]: And whenever something has multiple layers, it's automatically profound.
[Guest]: I'm not judging it, okay?
[Guest]: When it is flat and literal, there is nothing else to it.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: When we make it a bubble, we're making it flat and literal, we're taking away the layers
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: But when we say art is, we are in the studio having this conversation, art is not just
[Guest]: what I'm saying and what you're saying.
[Guest]: It's about what you're evoking.
[Guest]: It's about what the recorder is looking at.
[Guest]: It's about what I see out of the window.
[Guest]: It's about all the complexities that's going in my head and your head as we're having this
[Guest]: conversation beyond this room, then it becomes something so vibrant, right?
[Guest]: So I would like to trust that kind of art, okay?
[Guest]: It doesn't mean that art has to be, that has to be like overtly political.
[Guest]: No, I'm not saying that.
[Guest]: To your second question, that's, in fact, something I've struggled with.
[Guest]: The artist and the art, you know, what does one do?
[Guest]: And I don't have a correct answer to it.
[Guest]: I tried grappling with it in a piece I wrote about Wagner, Tiagaraja, and about Polanski.
[Guest]: Very three different reasons.
[Guest]: And I want to bring Daniel Barenboim here.
[Guest]: He's a very well-known Jewish conductor.
[Guest]: And he did something which really impacted me, you know.
[Guest]: So you know what Wagner's music represents, an anti-Semitic kind of history.
[Guest]: And he's performing in Jerusalem.
[Guest]: And Barenboim says he's going to perform Wagner with an audience of Jews.
[Guest]: That was such a profound idea to me.
[Guest]: Now, do we dissociate Wagner from the music?
[Guest]: Do we say Wagner is independent to what the historical impressions he leaves, and it's
[Guest]: just music?
[Guest]: But Barenboim does something interesting.
[Guest]: He kind of conflates both.
[Guest]: He brings the individual in, or what the individual represents in, and he says, I still want us
[Guest]: to hear it.
[Guest]: Now what does this do to the experience?
[Guest]: I think that's where we have an interesting muddle.
[Guest]: So do I not stop watching Roman Polanski?
[Guest]: No, but I'm saying if we can, in a way, keep that tension real between the horrible things
[Guest]: of the artist and the most moving things of the art produced or art object, then that
[Guest]: tension gives us a different experience.
[Amit Varma]: So we can condemn what the artists read, but celebrate the art.
[Guest]: At the same time, at the same time, I think, but we can't forget it.
[Guest]: I'm saying at the same time, I have a problem if you say, you know, I don't care what kind
[Guest]: of person the artist is.
[Guest]: I'm not willing to do that.
[Guest]: I'm saying you have to allow that tension to be there in your experience.
[Guest]: It may change the way you experience the art.
[Guest]: But if you say, I don't care about who the person, the artist is, I mean, that to me
[Guest]: is again another way of just brushing something under the carpet.
[Guest]: So it's a complicated situation for which there's no absolute answer.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I find it evocative what you say about art being so complex with so many
[Amit Varma]: layers and that's what makes it beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: But in modern times, what often happens is that politics looks for simple narratives
[Amit Varma]: and therefore embracing this complexity and accepting that dissonance, like you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that on the one hand, there is the ugliness to deal with.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, there is all this beauty can get hard.
[Amit Varma]: And a related question to that is when you when you were writing Sebastian and Sons,
[Amit Varma]: for example, or whenever you've kind of looked back on history, how hard is it to not judge
[Amit Varma]: historical characters by contemporary morality?
[Amit Varma]: For example, some of the people in Sebastian and Sons like Vaidyanathan Iyer or later,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Palgatmani Iyer, where you write about Palgatmani Iyer, you can see how a lot
[Amit Varma]: of that entrenched Brahmanism is there in his behavior and the things he does.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, he has an extremely tender relationship with Parlandu who is his,
[Amit Varma]: you know, chief maker.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost touching the sort of bond that they have.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, and versions of this question can go back forever to Jefferson and his slave
[Unknown]: Sally Hemings and all the way.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, when you look back at history, do you try to dissociate contemporary morality
[Amit Varma]: with that?
[Amit Varma]: Or you say that, no, you know, there's also something useful in looking at the things
[Guest]: they did with this lens.
[Guest]: I mean, I think it's important to look at all this as a flow, okay, whatever direction
[Guest]: it takes.
[Guest]: I don't think it's correct to impose upon modern morality or modern ethical living,
[Guest]: because this is also a movement.
[Guest]: We are not in some absolute position even today, right?
[Guest]: But at the same time, I think putting a lens on what happened is very, very important,
[Guest]: because the tendency for us is to say it was all then like this.
[Guest]: And now we're all somehow perfect in some sense, you know, and I find that deeply disturbing.
[Guest]: So when you put the lens on something behind, you're also saying, okay, but what does it
[Guest]: say about us now?
[Guest]: And what I like to do is also when I put the lens on history, to add some layer of nuance
[Guest]: into that, because Maneer is not a flat person.
[Guest]: I mean, he's not like, you know, so as you said, there is this whole tenderness, there
[Guest]: is love, but there is hierarchy.
[Guest]: There is this inability to accept the reality, inability to go beyond his own limitations.
[Guest]: So that is interesting for me, because that is as real today as it was then.
[Amit Varma]: Because I am like that.
[Amit Varma]: I'm no different.
[Amit Varma]: I think we all like that in the sense that there are some things we can see and it's
[Amit Varma]: almost poignant that they're invisible to him.
[Guest]: And there are so many things that must be invisible to you.
[Guest]: Exactly the point.
[Guest]: And which is why that lens is important.
[Guest]: Can putting the lens on Maneer with the things that he was blind to somehow reflect upon
[Guest]: what are we blind to?
[Guest]: That is what I find interesting within that.
[Guest]: It is not about the character itself.
[Guest]: It's about the fact, okay, just to see if I'm, you know, if somebody read Sebastian
[Guest]: Sons and just see what you described as, you know, this tenderness, and they also see this,
[Guest]: can they think about themselves, you know, in some way, can I think about, I mean, I
[Amit Varma]: do that.
[Guest]: Can they think about what they have normalized in their own lives?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: That is the hope.
[Guest]: That is truly the hope that that is why it makes sense looking at the past for me, at
[Guest]: least as a writer.
[Guest]: Because then I think you can use those, because I don't think society in terms of how it operates
[Guest]: in frameworks has ever changed.
[Guest]: The frameworks are always the same.
[Guest]: It's the interior, the semantics and the structures that may vary.
[Guest]: The basic framework is the same.
[Guest]: So can we just shift the framework and say, so even in the book, when you see it move
[Guest]: through time, you will see that the framework is constantly there.
[Guest]: It's just a negotiational table is changing, right?
[Guest]: So that is, for me, very important.
[Amit Varma]: And for me, where your book also works is that it's not it is both a political and a
[Amit Varma]: non political book.
[Amit Varma]: It's a political book, because of course, it is looking at all of these things that
[Amit Varma]: are happening, all of these power structures of Brahmanism is playing out how misogyny
[Amit Varma]: and patriarchy and all of those are playing out.
[Amit Varma]: But what it also refreshingly does is that all of these people are humans to me, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I begin to feel that like someone like Mani Aiyar, where I both have enormous empathy
[Amit Varma]: for him.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you feel like, okay, he's trapped in that, you know, he might be doing some
[Amit Varma]: things which we would not approve of today or do ourselves, but he's kind of trapped.
[Amit Varma]: Before we sort of get to talking about the book, which is a very rich and interesting
[Amit Varma]: book.
[Amit Varma]: For those of us who are not so familiar with it, which really includes me also, to an extent,
[Amit Varma]: give us a summary of what you discovered about this world of Carnatic music about all the
[Amit Varma]: sort of the unexpected ugliness that lay behind the book, not through this book, particularly,
[Guest]: but in general,
[Guest]: You know, yeah, so, I mean, I grew up in the interiors of Carnatic music, okay.
[Guest]: And I grew up in the interiors having the privilege of being an elite in the interior.
[Guest]: So, you know, I had it all, you know, yeah, I mean, it's like, I was not a middle class
[Guest]: interior representative, I was an elite interior representative, you know, so I even looked
[Guest]: down upon the middle class structures within it, right?
[Guest]: You are the Karan Johar of Carnatic music, I'm gonna let that pass, but I will go on.
[Guest]: But so, I lived it.
[Guest]: I was definitely part of the power corridors.
[Guest]: I probably still am, how much do I dissociate from it?
[Guest]: And that's, that's what I live with all my life.
[Guest]: And so I did not see any of these things for a very long time.
[Guest]: But then when all these, you know, internal churnings happened towards me, I mean, within
[Guest]: me, I think I was asking these questions of myself.
[Guest]: You know, I was asking these questions of, you know, okay, what am I really representing?
[Guest]: What am I really singing?
[Guest]: And what is that, that pleasure that I'm getting from it, the moment that the ugliness I discovered
[Guest]: and is not unique of Carnatic music, Carnatic music is my entry point, because that's, that's
[Guest]: all I knew.
[Guest]: Just the fact of how patriarchy, how casteism are so normalized, I think that's the biggest
[Guest]: learning for me, that it's so normalized, there's a homogeneousness to it.
[Guest]: And homogeneousness is in fact taken as a conditionality.
[Guest]: You know, the kind of people who should come, where should this art be produced?
[Guest]: What is the ideal place that you should consume it?
[Guest]: How should the people there behave?
[Guest]: How should the women who come to the concert dress?
[Guest]: And how, what did my music class tell me about my identity?
[Guest]: I had to, why was that the music class was not just about music, but it's about so many
[Guest]: things else and what was being conveyed to me, you know, all these like started hitting
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: And I realized that the entire world is a world of a certain homogeneous, upper caste
[Guest]: patriarchal structure.
[Amit Varma]: And within this, we are celebrating Indian culture.
[Guest]: And not just by default, there are rigidly enforced entry barriers, you know, it's very
[Guest]: important to understand how these entry barriers operate, you know, and they've operated in
[Guest]: different ways through time, again, when you go back to the past, but the barrier is still
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: It's these invisible screens, you know, it's, it's, everybody knows that.
[Guest]: I mean, it's, there's this move, I always use this, I have used in reshaping art, there's
[Guest]: this Tamil movie called Kaka Muttai.
[Guest]: And I would urge everybody to watch it.
[Guest]: I think it's on Amazon Prime or something.
[Guest]: And there is this scene, and the scene is this, the story is very simple.
[Guest]: It's about these two kids, who a pizzeria is open in their locality, and they are kids
[Guest]: from a neighboring slum.
[Guest]: And they want to get into pizzeria, and the watchman looks at them and throws them out.
[Guest]: So they then decide they need better clothes.
[Guest]: And if they wear better clothes, they'll be allowed in.
[Guest]: So they decide to go to a mall.
[Guest]: So they go to this, two kids go and they turn the, you know, just turn the end of the road
[Guest]: and they see the mall and one, they're brothers, one of them looks at the other and said, oh,
[Guest]: I said, they're going to let us in.
[Guest]: You know, nobody has said they can't enter the mall.
[Guest]: The kids have seen the mall, and they've decided that they're not going to be allowed in.
[Guest]: So this is what we should understand with great care.
[Guest]: So these designs are always there.
[Guest]: We design society to decide who can come in, who cannot come in, what sound can come in,
[Guest]: what sound is outer, when do we throw somebody out, when do we allow somebody in?
[Guest]: So for example, how do I need to change in order to be acceptable?
[Guest]: We see this world over.
[Guest]: It's not just in India, it's ethnicity, it's color, it's race.
[Guest]: We see the need.
[Guest]: So it's like everybody is playing a part.
[Guest]: The person who has power, cultural power, is making sure these notions are there, making
[Guest]: sure they keep changing according to time, but fundamentals are there.
[Guest]: People who want to look at social and cultural mobility are saying, okay, how can I become
[Guest]: more like that?
[Guest]: And that's such an ugly structure in it, that you need to give up something of yourself,
[Guest]: you want acceptability at this place, first of all, you place it at a higher level.
[Guest]: So what about people?
[Guest]: What about different cultures?
[Guest]: What about different habits?
[Guest]: So what are we saying?
[Guest]: You know, it is, it's very, honestly, even as I say, this is so deeply disturbing for
[Amit Varma]: me.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of it is invisible and unstated, as you just said, in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if a lower caste person enters the house of, you know, someone from a higher caste, he
[Guest]: will instinctively sit on the floor or he'll be embarrassed about entering.
[Guest]: And this is so instinctive that to, you know, to someone who's grown up like that, it's
[Guest]: just understood.
[Guest]: You don't think about it.
[Guest]: And also, I can, if that person did not sit on the floor and just sat on the sofa, what
[Guest]: would my instinctive react, even the progressive TM Krishna think, for a split second in my
[Guest]: mind will go this thought, oh, now what does that mean?
[Guest]: It means that somehow I expected a certain behavior from this individual.
[Guest]: And the person has transgressed.
[Guest]: I may correct myself for to tick off the liberal box.
[Guest]: But the fact is that feeling is there, right?
[Guest]: So these, I mean, I always find it very interesting that when you talk about caste, people find
[Guest]: problematic.
[Guest]: But, you know, if you just in the frame and talk about gender, I know women and trans
[Guest]: people know this every day, you know, and it's always fascinating for me when upper
[Guest]: caste women feminists don't get it in caste, but they get it in feminism.
[Guest]: I'm like, do you realize it's the same framework?
[Guest]: It's that look that you talk about.
[Guest]: It's the inequality in looking at two people that you talk about that you feel it.
[Guest]: I would never feed it because I'm a man and I'm, I have everything going for me, but it's
[Guest]: the same framework that happens in caste and race and in ethnicity.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, there's a nice bit from Sebastian and Sons, which I marked out, which expresses
[Amit Varma]: exactly this.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll quote from your book, and this is someone speaking, quote, the relationship
[Amit Varma]: between the widwan and honorific often used for seasoned artists and the worker is like
[Amit Varma]: that of a husband and wife.
[Amit Varma]: Only if there are arguments and disagreements between the husband and the wife, will the
[Amit Varma]: family move ahead.
[Amit Varma]: If I am upset, I will not say much.
[Amit Varma]: They will notice that from my facial expression and introspect about how they spoke to me.
[Amit Varma]: It has been going on like this, and it should hopefully continue, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, this spoke to me so much because it's, it's casteism and the patriarchy, and
[Amit Varma]: they're both together.
[Amit Varma]: And all of us have experienced, you know, if not one, at least the other in some form
[Amit Varma]: of the other.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also reminded of this, but there was this very interesting tweet by a writer
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter called Asim Ali, who's a journalist, I think he writes for various people where
[Amit Varma]: he pointed out that if you are at a restaurant and you're mistaken for the waiter, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you immediately feel, you know, a sense of hurt, pride and humiliation.
[Guest]: And the very fact that we do say something about all of this, that's what that's exactly
[Guest]: what I'm saying.
[Guest]: And we all feel it.
[Guest]: I mean, I was actually the bookstore, this happened just about last week.
[Guest]: And somebody came behind me.
[Guest]: And he tapped me and he said, where is the fiction section?
[Guest]: For a second.
[Guest]: I was like offended.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: How dare you ask me that question?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Because then I turned around, he said, sorry, sir.
[Guest]: But the fact is that somebody could presume that I'm just a person in the shop floor.
[Guest]: Yeah, we are offended.
[Amit Varma]: We definitely are offended.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a sharp observation.
[Amit Varma]: And you were talking about pizza.
[Amit Varma]: So I have to tell you this before this, when we were at lunch, I told you about how much
[Amit Varma]: I love TikTok and you should check it out.
[Amit Varma]: So there is this nice TikTok video doing the rounds where, you know, this girl calls a
[Amit Varma]: pizza hut, and she says, pizza hut, and voice at the other end says, yes.
[Amit Varma]: And she says, apke paas pizza hai?
[Amit Varma]: And the voice at the other end says, yes.
[Amit Varma]: And then the girl gives this wistful look and says, maze hai yaar, maze hai, apke paas
[Guest]: pizza hai, you know, which is both very funny, but it's got resonance with that.
[Guest]: It completely has a resonance with that, yeah, definitely does.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a sort of a lot of that happening on TikTok, but we'll sort of define it later.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so just to kind of sum it up, there are two things happening.
[Amit Varma]: One, as you described, is in the world of Carnatic music, one, as you described, that
[Amit Varma]: there have traditionally been all of these entry barriers.
[Amit Varma]: But also what is happening is that there is a denigration of other forms of art, and this
[Amit Varma]: elevation of the classical into a fine art, like even I have grown up with this impression
[Amit Varma]: that Hindustani classical and Carnatic are like the high forms of art.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, in my case, they've intimidated me and said nahi main rock music sununga,
[Amit Varma]: but that's the whole impression.
[Amit Varma]: And as you also point out in your book of essays as well, before this, about art, we've
[Amit Varma]: seen what, for example, in America, supposedly lower forms of art like jazz, gospel, hip
[Amit Varma]: hop coming up, and you know, now jazz is pretty much considered, you know, you're supposed
[Amit Varma]: to be classy, you're supposed to be a classy person, if you listen to jazz, and you're
[Amit Varma]: very sophisticated, if you argue about who's better Miles Ravis or Coltrane, and all of
[Amit Varma]: that happens.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, that is still a deep problem here, an entrenched problem.
[Amit Varma]: So what's been your sort of experience of trying to do something about that?
[Guest]: So initially, I was only thinking of Carnatic music, okay.
[Guest]: So now retrospectively, I can see why that was problematic in the sense it was about
[Guest]: this music, about the fact that I felt that this it lacked any kind of societal, political,
[Guest]: ethicalness, and also the music needed to kind of breathe, so to speak.
[Guest]: But it was still about the music.
[Guest]: I mean, I had not really given a year to different cultures, this is the truth.
[Guest]: And I think that happened slowly.
[Guest]: And slowly, I started looking at different cultures.
[Guest]: And that's when I started questioning that word classical.
[Guest]: You know, some people may say classical is not an Indian word, it's but I think Shastri
[Guest]: is as deeply problematic as classical.
[Guest]: Absolutely, what is Shastri, who writes the Shastra, we can ask 100 questions about it.
[Guest]: But I also believe that classical music in some way was superior.
[Guest]: And to be able to appreciate, we've all been told this, that to appreciate classical music,
[Guest]: you need to kind of a certain level of sophistication, you must have a year you must have kind of
[Guest]: trained.
[Guest]: So, you know, and I believed it, I honestly believed it.
[Guest]: So what we have is this is representative of what Indian culture has been to the world.
[Guest]: We always have the main shows being the classical world, and the side shows being some drum
[Guest]: dance from Manipur or Nagaland Meghalaya, then some other thing, you know, that those
[Guest]: are the diversity, they are the little crumbs we throw for diversity.
[Guest]: But the main real representative has been these forms.
[Guest]: We have represented India culturally like this in India and across the world.
[Guest]: We treat those artists differently, we treat the classical artists differently, all this
[Guest]: has been happening.
[Guest]: But I think what happened was, when I started engaging with other art forms, you know, other
[Guest]: forms, which were not within the classical tag, is when things started becoming clear.
[Guest]: But the first person who put the seed in my head is a musicologist named Harold Powers.
[Guest]: Powers studied Carnatic music, and actually did his PhD on Hindustani music.
[Guest]: And he was towards the end of his life, and he visited my home, and I was much younger
[Guest]: and very casually asked Harold, so Harold, what's the difference between classical and
[Guest]: folk?
[Guest]: And he didn't bat an eyelid, he said, very simple.
[Guest]: As an art form goes up the ladder of society, it moves from becoming folk to classical.
[Guest]: And when he first told me that, I thought that was rubbish.
[Guest]: Okay, but I'm happy that that quote never went out of my head.
[Guest]: It stayed with me.
[Guest]: And it kept bothering me.
[Guest]: You know, how can you say this?
[Guest]: Are you saying there's nothing intrinsic about the art that makes it more special?
[Guest]: I mean, I sing it, it has to be more special.
[Guest]: But when I started then investigating it, you see that he's absolutely right.
[Guest]: He just nailed it.
[Guest]: It's a question of who is participating in the creation of that art?
[Guest]: Who's creating it?
[Guest]: Who's listening to it?
[Guest]: And that defines whether you call it classical or you take the world classical across the
[Guest]: globe, everywhere in the world, it is the cultural elite who are defining the classical.
[Guest]: So there has to be something about it.
[Guest]: So this was the first thing.
[Guest]: The other thing is when I started engaging with art forms which were not considered classical,
[Guest]: and I will never forget one experience, I went to a little village near Chennai.
[Guest]: And this is art form called Katte Koothu.
[Guest]: And incredible artist Mr. Rajagopal, and he runs a school for this art form, and I performed.
[Guest]: At that point, I was engaging with art forms, but I think the snoot in me had not gone yet.
[Guest]: You know, you still feel something.
[Guest]: I mean, this has to be special.
[Guest]: Come on.
[Guest]: And I remember I performed that day.
[Guest]: So I was performing in an area which was alien.
[Guest]: I was culturally alien to the people there.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: It was extremely intimidating.
[Guest]: Classical musicians never usually do that.
[Guest]: There were about 1000 villagers from across the villages.
[Guest]: And then was a Koothu performance.
[Guest]: Now the Koothu unfolded.
[Guest]: I had no clue what was going on.
[Guest]: Every person sitting there knew every nuance, every little joke.
[Guest]: And I'm thinking to myself, who is the sophisticated here?
[Guest]: Me or the 1000 villagers who I will consider uneducated, crude, you know, these words called
[Guest]: ethnic, all these words that we use, you know, raw, real, in aesthetic senses, when we use
[Guest]: that word, it's not a compliment.
[Guest]: Let's be very clear.
[Guest]: It's not a compliment.
[Guest]: And that's when it hit me that this whole notion of sophistication, complexity, subtlety
[Guest]: is very specific to every art form.
[Guest]: If I'm able to dive into another culture, then I will feel it in that way.
[Guest]: And that's when this whole thing, like crumbled, that these words are only social constructions,
[Guest]: they're political constructions, which is why even if, you know, jazz is considered
[Guest]: this profound thing, it's never called classical.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because it ticks every box that you want to take.
[Guest]: It's complicated.
[Guest]: It's difficult to understand.
[Guest]: Even if you read 100 books, you can do an online course on jazz, you still won't understand.
[Guest]: I won't still understand it.
[Guest]: But it still is not called classical.
[Guest]: Classical is still white man's music.
[Guest]: There is something to it.
[Guest]: So that's when I realized that this is not an aesthetic point.
[Guest]: This is not a musical point.
[Guest]: This is purely about people and about society and about politics of it.
[Guest]: When you change the politics, something else may become, in fact, you've got a very nice
[Amit Varma]: line in your book, which I'll just read out, which, you know, is in the context of North
[Amit Varma]: Chennai, where all the Dalit slave and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And your sentence goes, quote, culture is not a word commonly associated with North
[Amit Varma]: Chennai, simply because this culture is not that of the upper caste, stop quote, which
[Amit Varma]: kind of says everything is then.
[Amit Varma]: And is it a fair analogy to say that what you're talking about, you know, you're trained
[Amit Varma]: in Carnatic music, so you see all the sophistication and all that, but is it a fair analogy to
[Amit Varma]: say that it's like you're being really good at a language and a language which you know
[Amit Varma]: nothing of sounds like noise to you till you actually take the effort to immerse yourself?
[Amit Varma]: And at some point in the book, you've spoken about noise becoming music, you know, and
[Guest]: the analogy is very true.
[Guest]: That's what it is.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And what we should also realize how difficult it is for us to actually move to another culture
[Guest]: or shall we dive into another culture, it's we're always carrying something with us, okay.
[Guest]: And because we always carry something, it's so much harder to do.
[Guest]: And so really, to be immerse yourself in multiple cultures is not an easy thing.
[Guest]: And probably we're all never going to be able to do it.
[Guest]: But even if you do it once with something, then we realize about this whole idea of how
[Guest]: can noise become music.
[Guest]: So, you know, I'll give you a very, very Indian example.
[Guest]: Many Hindustani musicians think that Carnatic musicians sing Besur.
[Guest]: We are not singing Besur because the movement that they hear is Besur is actually a technical
[Guest]: required movement in Carnatic music.
[Guest]: Now, is it off tune or not?
[Guest]: Is there an absolute answer to the question?
[Guest]: When is somebody singing in pitch?
[Guest]: Even a simple idea like that is so complicated.
[Guest]: To your ear it may seem off pitch, to my ear, musically, that's in pitch.
[Guest]: So I mean, this is a classic and then listen to Makhan music.
[Guest]: I mean, their movements sound Besur to me.
[Guest]: All of us sound Besur to the Western classical musician.
[Guest]: So who is singing off tune?
[Guest]: We don't know.
[Guest]: That's what I'm saying.
[Guest]: It's so specific.
[Guest]: So and this is very important, not just musically to understand, to culturally understand, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: So it happened to me when I heard so many kinds of music first, I thought it was just
[Guest]: noisy.
[Guest]: This is loud.
[Guest]: But now I feel the music inside sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: So is it a journey then you then make from this intellectual understanding that no, this
[Amit Varma]: kind of music is also legit in its own way to an emotional understanding where you can
[Amit Varma]: just sit back and enjoy that music and it doesn't sound Besur anymore?
[Guest]: I think that's the most important part.
[Guest]: The intellectual understanding doesn't even scratch the surface.
[Guest]: The fact is that none of us are going to change because we comprehend something or we believe
[Guest]: that intellectually that's right.
[Guest]: We have to feel the music.
[Guest]: You have to feel it.
[Guest]: I mean, you have to feel the people.
[Guest]: That's the message.
[Guest]: You feel the people.
[Guest]: You feel the dancer.
[Guest]: You feel the culture.
[Guest]: You have to feel the streets.
[Guest]: You have to feel that you should taste the food.
[Guest]: You have to.
[Guest]: I mean, it's all that.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And then somewhere, at least momentarily, you feel you're part of it.
[Guest]: And then that drumbeat is right at the bottom of your stomach.
[Amit Varma]: And that's happened to you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Your smile.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, and that moment is incredibly emotional.
[Amit Varma]: And does it then change the way you look at your own music?
[Amit Varma]: Are you taking some of that into your music?
[Guest]: So yeah, it does.
[Guest]: I mean, it does change the way you hear.
[Guest]: I mean, you often say that the music is not in the singing or playing.
[Guest]: It's in the listening.
[Guest]: The painting is not in the brush.
[Amit Varma]: It's in the scene.
[Amit Varma]: There's a similar thing I like to say that, you know, great art is not about talent.
[Amit Varma]: It's about judgment.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Separate thing.
[Guest]: But I'm saying that, you know, when you start feeling it, then you hear differently.
[Guest]: You know, the lines kind of disappear, you know.
[Guest]: This is right.
[Guest]: This is not right.
[Guest]: So kind of understand context for this technique, you know, and what are the things you can
[Guest]: judge?
[Guest]: I mean, I mean, how do you separate things?
[Guest]: These things become far more fluid.
[Guest]: And I can tell you the way I hear Carnatic music, which is musically my home, is entirely
[Guest]: different.
[Guest]: It's entirely different.
[Guest]: I hear it differently.
[Guest]: I know I hear it differently.
[Guest]: I don't look for when I sing.
[Guest]: I don't look for the things that I was looking for in my own music anymore.
[Guest]: I know I'm not looking for it.
[Guest]: I don't care a damn about so many things that I cared so much about in the music that I
[Amit Varma]: sang.
[Amit Varma]: So as a performer, where is then the intersection between your new way of hearing this music
[Amit Varma]: and you know, how your understanding of your own music has evolved and how the audience
[Amit Varma]: is because it's still the same audience and you still want to push the buttons and get
[Guest]: the applause.
[Guest]: So.
[Guest]: So the thing is that I do like to hope that I push less buttons now, but nevertheless,
[Guest]: actually that has been an interesting journey itself.
[Guest]: There are two parts.
[Guest]: The one is that when things started changing the way I performed, the people who thought
[Guest]: that I was committing blasphemy, that I was killing the art form, that I was disrespecting
[Guest]: tradition.
[Guest]: A lot of people just disliked what I was doing.
[Guest]: And though I was singing all within the structures within the environment and this and what I
[Guest]: want to say is also tough for me.
[Guest]: So again, you know, you may believe in something, but when you actually do it, it may not still
[Guest]: be you.
[Guest]: It takes some time because before it becomes you.
[Guest]: So as the audience was struggling, I was also struggling, right?
[Guest]: Because you're kind of demolding yourself in some way.
[Guest]: And that process can be very difficult because you're grappling.
[Guest]: You have nothing to follow.
[Guest]: You don't know what you're doing.
[Guest]: You just know you just have to get out of this and your problems are visible only to
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And because of the discomfort, the audience goes through incredible discomfort, enormous
[Guest]: difficulty to understand what is this guy doing?
[Guest]: I'm going through discomfort saying, you know, does this answer what I'm asking for or am
[Guest]: I asking for?
[Guest]: What am I asking for?
[Guest]: I don't even know that.
[Guest]: So there is this great amount of churn that's happening to everybody who's participating
[Guest]: in this.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: That's one part.
[Guest]: And then there is, there is the whole other idea of how does this respond to the politics
[Guest]: that you're talking about, to the social.
[Guest]: So you know, things like, where do I sit?
[Guest]: Things change the way I sat on stage.
[Guest]: I completely changed the way we sat on stage.
[Guest]: And then the interesting thing happened is I started also questioning space, place.
[Guest]: So I, you know, sang in open spaces where the audience was not the traditional audience.
[Guest]: I've sung at a beach when there were six kids listening to me with their hands in their
[Guest]: ears saying, this is awful.
[Guest]: To them, mine was noise.
[Guest]: How does an artist react to that?
[Guest]: You know, singing in a bus, singing to people that have no clue, you know, they're different
[Guest]: culture entirely.
[Guest]: In my city, just one kilometer away from the suburb where everybody will applaud everything
[Guest]: I'm singing.
[Guest]: One kilometer later, these people think this is noisy stuff, man, ask them to stop.
[Guest]: So what does that do to me?
[Guest]: You know, that also changed me.
[Guest]: That also changed the way I was, I was thinking I was singing.
[Guest]: So it's multiple things involved here.
[Guest]: One is that internal musical rediscovery, hopefully.
[Guest]: Then there is the idea of place and the idea of people.
[Guest]: All these three are at play.
[Guest]: And which is why I think all these three need to be at play for art to remain true.
[Guest]: You know, you can say that I'm making art, which is not elitist, but if you're just going
[Guest]: to make it and make it, make sure that it's only in a gallery where a few people can enter.
[Guest]: It's still that.
[Guest]: So can you deconstruct a gallery?
[Guest]: Not only deconstruct your art, but deconstruct the gallery.
[Guest]: These, you know, also the kind of people, the moment you do this, it's all fluid, which
[Guest]: means it's mayhem, which means you really don't know what's going to come out of all
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: You know, when I sang on a, on a moving public transport bus, it was the most incredible
[Guest]: experience by the end of it.
[Guest]: It's a moving bus.
[Amit Varma]: How did that happen?
[Guest]: So this is part of many projects that we are involved in, right?
[Guest]: So as we moved from, as I move from not just talking about Carnatic music, the fact that
[Guest]: we are looking at different cultures and each are occupying different spaces and also at
[Guest]: a different hierarchical position, how do we create little contestation?
[Guest]: You need to create contestation between different cultures.
[Guest]: You need to allow them to kind of come in, you know, kind of bang each other and some
[Guest]: amount of equality, at least for some time.
[Guest]: So one of the things we said is, why don't we just take the Carnatics and the classicals
[Guest]: onto a bus, this public transport bus.
[Guest]: So we call it, now it's called MTC, I think it used to be called PTC when we were young.
[Guest]: And we, I was not going to sing.
[Guest]: So we did this relay of music.
[Guest]: So we had not just Carnatic music, but we had some Tamil rock, we had Carnatic, we had
[Guest]: some Naam Sankirtan, all happening like a relay.
[Guest]: So these musicians, all young musicians had to board the bus at different bus stops.
[Guest]: And they hand over the baton to the other person, it was fun.
[Guest]: So I said, the first time we did it, I said, I want to check out how it is.
[Guest]: Was it recorded, video shooting?
[Guest]: There's a video on YouTube of it, of me singing.
[Amit Varma]: That'll be linked from the show.
[Guest]: So what I did was I just got onto the bus in one of the bus stops, I was just going
[Guest]: to check it out.
[Guest]: But these young guys said, you have to sing.
[Guest]: I mean, how can you not sing?
[Guest]: It was unbelievable.
[Guest]: I mean, just the experience, you see, it was unbelievable because I was completely exposed.
[Guest]: I was entirely vulnerable.
[Guest]: I couldn't push any button, you couldn't push any button, that's the point.
[Guest]: Once you know your audience, you push a button.
[Guest]: Once you know your environment, you can push a button.
[Guest]: You know the place, the people, the content, everything.
[Guest]: If everything is removed, you can't push any button.
[Guest]: You don't know whether the person is going to hate what you're doing.
[Guest]: You don't know if you're going to get acceptability.
[Guest]: You want to be accepted.
[Guest]: You're an artist.
[Guest]: You want acceptance.
[Guest]: You want the applause.
[Guest]: But you have no clue how to get it, man.
[Guest]: And it was, it was exhilarating.
[Guest]: I have, it was also panic, you're scared.
[Guest]: You know, by the time I did this, I've been in the field for what, two decades.
[Guest]: I've never been scared of being on stage, but that day I was terrified.
[Guest]: I was terrified when I sang on the beach for the first time, because I didn't know who's
[Guest]: going to, what's going to happen.
[Guest]: Am I going to be discarded?
[Guest]: You know, is somebody going to say, stop?
[Guest]: Is somebody going to scream, for example, say, hey, please stop.
[Guest]: Get out.
[Guest]: I mean, so on the bus, this happened.
[Guest]: I'll never forget.
[Guest]: It was the last leg when these young guys said, you have to sing.
[Guest]: So I belted out a song.
[Guest]: And I remember as we came to the terminus, bus terminus, everybody on the roads were
[Guest]: wondering where music was coming from, right?
[Guest]: And there was this man who was drunk and he started dancing.
[Guest]: He was on the road and he's like walking with the bus dancing.
[Guest]: Is this in the video?
[Guest]: I don't think that's in the video.
[Amit Varma]: Unfortunately.
[Amit Varma]: We'll have to imagine it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And I was like, this is the most beautiful connection I've made.
[Guest]: You know, we belong to very different worlds, very different ideas.
[Guest]: He just heard the music and danced.
[Guest]: And because he's drunk now, he'll forget the connection the next morning.
[Guest]: I wish I was drunk.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they would have leveled it off.
[Amit Varma]: How did your traditional audience, what you've called the 25,000 Brahmins who congregate every
[Amit Varma]: December in Chennai, how did your traditional audience react to you in light of the politics
[Amit Varma]: that you were now expressing?
[Amit Varma]: React to your music in light of the politics?
[Guest]: You had two or three different reactions.
[Guest]: Of course, my politics is and was very disconcerting.
[Guest]: And I can understand why it is.
[Guest]: I mean, there's no point, I can't pontificate because it's true.
[Guest]: I mean, I guess 20 years ago, I would have probably also looked at somebody who was doing
[Guest]: this and what the hell is he doing?
[Guest]: You know, so I can understand it at some level.
[Guest]: So there were people who either said, I've had people sending me an email saying I've
[Guest]: thrown all your CDs.
[Guest]: I don't have any CD of yours anymore.
[Guest]: You've disrespected Hindu gods, you've disrespected Indian culture, therefore, I don't listen
[Amit Varma]: to you anymore.
[Amit Varma]: I've had that.
[Guest]: They can't do that anymore because you can't throw MP3s.
[Guest]: Yeah, I know.
[Amit Varma]: I'm on YouTube, they're stuck with me.
[Guest]: So they've had people who have actually even now many people say, how is this guy who produces
[Guest]: such divine music speak such filth?
[Guest]: I've had many people say that.
[Guest]: In so many words.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: Those words actually.
[Guest]: I'm not even paraphrasing.
[Guest]: So how can he be so filthy and say all these horrible things, but when he sings, it's divine.
[Guest]: You have that.
[Guest]: And you have also the other end of people who have never heard me, who listen to me
[Guest]: because of my politics, usually younger, younger people, and many people who don't belong within
[Guest]: the Carnatic world, who have now said, you know, I want to listen to this music because
[Guest]: I find it interesting that you can actually challenge it from being inside, which they
[Guest]: never thought was possible.
[Guest]: So you have different shades of all this happening.
[Guest]: So the power structures are uncomfortable with me.
[Guest]: But the fact of the matter is, I'm doing all this because I'm powerful.
[Guest]: So let's not run away from the fact that if I did this 20 years ago, I would have been
[Guest]: thrown and nobody would, we wouldn't be having this conversation.
[Guest]: So the fact also is the fact that I can, I can handle all this is because I know I have
[Guest]: the...
[Guest]: But you have also been deplatformed and stuff.
[Guest]: Oh, yeah, of course.
[Guest]: There's been many concerts cancelled.
[Guest]: It's happened in India.
[Guest]: It's happened in the US.
[Guest]: It's happened in the US, wow.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So this was about a couple of years, 2018, when actually some colleagues of mine were
[Guest]: targeted for singing Christian themes in Carnatic music.
[Guest]: And they were really bullied.
[Guest]: And especially the women, I mean, the trolling was just, you know, I can't even quote the
[Guest]: kind of things that were said, and I really pissed me off.
[Guest]: And there was some guy who said he'll break my legs also.
[Guest]: I mean, that also happened, but that is not so important.
[Guest]: So I put out saying, a video saying, I'm going to release a song on Allah and Jesus every
[Guest]: month in Carnatic music.
[Guest]: And it was done as a protest, saying that nobody has a right to tell me what I can sing
[Guest]: about.
[Guest]: And this music doesn't belong to any community, any religion.
[Guest]: And when I did that, I was just going to the US on a tour.
[Guest]: And the concert was at Washington DC at the Shiva Vishnu temple where I've sung Amti number
[Guest]: of times.
[Guest]: And they cancelled the concert.
[Guest]: And they said that they have been threatened by right wing groups.
[Guest]: And there was this huge blog this woman wrote about how they celebrated that the concert
[Guest]: was cancelled.
[Guest]: And I was shown my place and that Indian culture was protected.
[Guest]: And I understand recently that she's going to stand for election to something that the
[Guest]: same woman.
[Guest]: That's very interesting.
[Guest]: So I think it's Trump land.
[Guest]: But yeah, so that's happened too.
[Guest]: But I must say the positive of that, that happened.
[Guest]: But then a group got together on the very same day, same time, a concert in DC did happen
[Guest]: as a as an answer.
[Guest]: So that too happened.
[Guest]: Yes, it was cancelled.
[Guest]: But there are also people who came together and said this cannot happen.
[Guest]: And we will do the concert.
[Amit Varma]: So there are both sides to it.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that it's not just casteism.
[Amit Varma]: There is of course, you know, the sexism is there in the sense women cannot play the mridangam
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But there's also racism.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, Sudha Raghunathan, whose daughter married an African American
[Amit Varma]: gentleman and her concerts got cancelled because her son-in-law was African American.
[Guest]: Was it cancelled?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's what I've heard.
[Guest]: I knew she was trolled.
[Guest]: I know she was trolled.
[Guest]: She was trolled and her shows were cancelled in January apparently.
[Guest]: Okay, that's but you know, if you think of it, how far is casteism from racism?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's, you know, it's the same insularity, we are the group, everyone else is the other.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: In fact, we Indians are probably the most racist lot, especially, you know, and what
[Guest]: do you also forget is there's a homogeneousness more or less in bandwidth of so called Indians
[Guest]: abroad, who are the majority of Indians who have migrated, they're most of them coming
[Guest]: from forward caste or shall we say socially mobile, OBCs, if you look at the government
[Guest]: categorization.
[Guest]: And therefore, there's a certain homogeneousness of ideas and, and there is a certain commonness
[Guest]: with the way they want to build a narrative.
[Guest]: And the narrative casteism is entrenched.
[Guest]: And in casteism is color.
[Guest]: And therefore, the notion of the darker skin notion of the African American is also seen
[Guest]: as a lower caste.
[Guest]: The African American is seen as a lower caste.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So this just works perfectly in casteist narrative.
[Guest]: And that is why you have this ridiculous thing happening.
[Guest]: And there's a personal thing about somebody getting married, and has got nothing to do
[Guest]: with anybody, and, but then the person is actually harassed and trolled for a personal
[Amit Varma]: decision.
[Guest]: And her son-in-law was called the n-word.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, the surprising thing, Amit, is after all this, even people who are viewing it,
[Guest]: you know, forget the people who are throwing this nonsense out, maybe, you know, maybe
[Guest]: we can have a conversation with people, I don't know.
[Guest]: But even people are viewing it, just don't see the horribleness of it, or say, you know,
[Guest]: they shouldn't say this, but I just don't get that.
[Guest]: I mean, I just don't get it.
[Guest]: I said, you know, there can't be any but over there.
[Guest]: I mean, but a lot of us speak that way.
[Guest]: You know, they should have not made this public, they should have done the marriage quietly.
[Guest]: What do you mean?
[Guest]: You want to just say that these things don't happen?
[Guest]: What are we saying?
[Guest]: You know, so you'll be happy if the she had married a Jewish white person?
[Guest]: I mean, what are we saying?
[Guest]: I mean, these moments are horrible for the person experiencing it.
[Amit Varma]: These moments are also revealing.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the point I'd like to clarify is, and this is a common confusion that when
[Amit Varma]: you talk about all of you know, these upper caste NRIs taking their caste baggage with
[Amit Varma]: them, you don't mean to say that they are necessarily casteist or they are thinking
[Amit Varma]: in terms of caste consciously, it's just that they're carrying those entrenched ways of
[Amit Varma]: thinking and responding to the world.
[Amit Varma]: And it's completely internalized.
[Amit Varma]: They may be the best human beings otherwise, and all of that.
[Guest]: Very true.
[Guest]: You know, that's not a big problem, right?
[Guest]: When you speak in these terms, people think that you're painting somebody as evil people.
[Amit Varma]: They react defensively.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's not.
[Guest]: But that's why I keep saying I am still casteist.
[Guest]: You know, all these invisible ways.
[Guest]: I do it every day.
[Guest]: I do it.
[Guest]: I mean, especially, you know, sexist, casteist, I mean, you know, in your relationship with
[Guest]: your wife, there are things that you presume that your wife should be doing without even
[Guest]: thinking about it twice, whereas it comes from patriarchy that you don't recognize.
[Guest]: And then you, when you talk about it, you realize, yep, where is this coming?
[Guest]: So these things are so ingrained and normalized that we just don't see it.
[Guest]: So actually, a lot of times I will say that these are not intentional in that sense.
[Guest]: You're not purposely saying, I look at Amit, you're like this, and therefore I'm targeting.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: See, we're all pattern recognizers as a species.
[Guest]: And these are all patterns we've been taught to recognize, you know, starting from gender.
[Amit Varma]: These are instinctive aversions.
[Guest]: So we do all this automatically, we do this automatically, and these engines start working.
[Guest]: And, but it's important that we are aware that we are functioning in that manner.
[Guest]: I mean, that's the problem.
[Guest]: And I think what gets accentuated in a place like with the NRAs is the fact that at least
[Guest]: in India, you have to walk the street and go to the dhukan.
[Guest]: You know, you meet, even if you don't want to, people of diversity, you know, but what
[Guest]: happens in the States is you are a homogeneous lot, only meeting those people, carrying these
[Guest]: things from India and constantly reaffirming that over 20, 30 years, that makes it much
[Guest]: harder.
[Guest]: Actually, I'm saying that it's much harder for the NRAs to break free of this because
[Guest]: they don't, that they lose that connection of the possibility of being hit by something
[Guest]: that they never expected or experiencing people in a way that they never expected, because
[Guest]: you are this little bubble in these lit cities.
[Amit Varma]: And once you get into a comfort zone, you don't question it, which is why your journey
[Amit Varma]: is so surprising that you've reached the top of the Carnatic music ladder.
[Amit Varma]: And then you are, you know, you have the level of self reflection, I can imagine someone
[Amit Varma]: from the outside or someone who's not so successful doing that, you know, just speaking to this
[Amit Varma]: point, there's a beautiful poem by Akhil Katyal, who's just read a book out, and I'm just going
[Amit Varma]: to read that out.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sure you're familiar with it.
[Amit Varma]: But for those of my listeners who aren't, and the poem is called Poetic License, is
[Amit Varma]: by Akhil Katyal.
[Amit Varma]: One day when he was about 10 or 12, he asked his mother, what is my caste?
[Amit Varma]: Some boys in the school were asking, I didn't know what to say.
[Amit Varma]: The mother got up in the middle of a supper, beta, if you don't know it by now, it must
[Amit Varma]: be upper.
[Guest]: That's, that's a very important poem, because it's true of most of us.
[Guest]: You know, it's like, somebody told me is that if you are a Dalit, every day, every moment
[Guest]: of your life, you're reminded that you're a Dalit.
[Guest]: So when we all say, especially that, what caste, we never spoke about caste at home.
[Guest]: This is said very often, just means exactly what he said.
[Amit Varma]: It's that extra layer of awareness, even women carry it, you know, when women walk on the
[Amit Varma]: street, they have this extra layer of awareness, which is not important to us.
[Amit Varma]: We can take our being male for granted.
[Amit Varma]: No woman can do that.
[Amit Varma]: You enter a lift, you're looking at everyone who's there before you get in.
[Amit Varma]: And that's consistent, and it's normalized, and men don't see it.
[Guest]: And men think it's normal to look at a woman in a certain manner.
[Guest]: And you have to catch yourself sometimes doing things that you would not normally think,
[Guest]: you know, you know, it's not about whether you're liberal, progressive, etc, etc, etc.
[Guest]: This is not about being conservative.
[Guest]: This is just about these entrench habits.
[Guest]: So I catch myself looking in a certain manner at a woman so many times, then I see it myself.
[Amit Varma]: This is things that we do.
[Amit Varma]: You know, wife is listening to this.
[Amit Varma]: What are you saying?
[Amit Varma]: Okay, before we go into a break, and after the break, we have to get to your wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book.
[Amit Varma]: We're not doing it justice if we don't.
[Amit Varma]: But sort of a final question, just you know, going back to that old theme we were exploring
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, the evolution of Carnatic music and the setting it apart from other kinds
[Amit Varma]: of lower art, which are not classical and all that, did also the academies play a part
[Amit Varma]: in this?
[Amit Varma]: For example, in your book, there is this passage about the Music Academy, which you know, your
[Amit Varma]: grand uncle, T.T. Krishnamacharya played a part in founding, quote, the Music Academy,
[Amit Varma]: established in 1928, had quickly become the sanctum sanctorum of Carnatic music, sabhas
[Amit Varma]: such as Parthasarathy Swami Sabha, Perambur Sangeet Sabha, Jagannath Bhakt Sabha were
[Amit Varma]: changing the nature of Carnatic music consumption, ticket paying public and membership driven
[Amit Varma]: models became the accepted norm.
[Amit Varma]: This was enabled by Brahmin families migrating from Tanjavur, Tirunelveli and surrounding
[Amit Varma]: areas, the Chettiyars from Karaikudi district and other high culture seeking business communities
[Amit Varma]: such as the Mudaliars, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And what seems to me to be happening here, and where say Carnatic music gets this kind
[Amit Varma]: of advantage as it were over the other forms which are looked down upon, is that you have
[Amit Varma]: an academy, you have theory building around it, you have a pedagogy building around it,
[Amit Varma]: you have a community building around it, while other forms of music may survive sort of as
[Amit Varma]: oral traditions do, without this accumulated knowledge passing through to future generations.
[Guest]: Very important point you make.
[Guest]: So I think we have to go back to the political context of the times.
[Guest]: So this is a times of Hindu nationalism.
[Guest]: So there's not just a Carnatic phenomena, you see Bhatkande trying to do the same thing,
[Guest]: you see Paluskar trying to do the something, this whole notion of presenting Indian culture
[Guest]: as this very old, very pristine, you know, idea.
[Guest]: And so you have these people, all upper caste people, in the case of Khyal, they feel that
[Guest]: the Muslims have basically spoiled this art form, they sing whatever they want.
[Guest]: And so we need to get the original music.
[Guest]: So Bhatkande decides to go through the musicological way, Paluskar said bhakti is the way.
[Guest]: Bhakti is the essence of this music.
[Guest]: So he uses another channel.
[Guest]: So you have that happening, and that's when you have all the Gandharva Mahavidyas forming,
[Guest]: you have all these things.
[Guest]: A similar narrative is happening in the South.
[Guest]: But in the South, what is happening is that Devadasis are the targets.
[Guest]: Now, they are now by then considered niche.
[Guest]: So then they can't be part of something we are considered old and pure.
[Guest]: So then you again building a very, very nationalistic, very upper caste notion, theosophical society
[Guest]: plays a very important role in these constructions of what Hindu philosophy, Hindu history, the
[Guest]: Rishis in the Himalayas, all these notions, right?
[Guest]: So you have these art forms forming in that.
[Guest]: Thyagaraja is now becoming this saint, he becomes this real, beyond reality human being.
[Guest]: So all this construction is happening at the same time, everybody recognizes another battle
[Guest]: you have to fight with the British is not just emotionally getting this music, but also
[Guest]: say that it's technical, also say that it is intellectual.
[Guest]: So then you have this Music Academy forming, and it's fascinating if you go through Music
[Guest]: Academy discussions, and it's all documented, you have lawyers, okay, they're not professional
[Guest]: musicians.
[Guest]: So all these lawyers and well educated upper caste Brahmin men, who are having these debates
[Guest]: on Carnatic music with musicians.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: Okay, so they are saying so that's when the rules are then being formed, like you're then
[Guest]: giving knowledge validity in document.
[Guest]: Sounds like the Constituent Assembly debates, are these online?
[Guest]: Oh, it's online.
[Guest]: It's all online, you can go it's very interesting.
[Guest]: So that's part of creating intellectual capital.
[Guest]: That's actually creating knowledge.
[Guest]: And it has been modern.
[Guest]: And you're codifying it.
[Amit Varma]: Basically, it's a codification.
[Unknown]: Yeah, and it's a modern notion.
[Guest]: This has happened, the same thing is happening with Hindustani music.
[Guest]: And then the interesting part is post independence, we just continued the same narrative.
[Guest]: Just look at the institutions that were created for culture across the country.
[Guest]: That was for Bharatanatyam, private Carnatic music or Hindustani music for Kathakali.
[Guest]: So again, you're only looking at those art forms that are practiced by a certain group
[Guest]: of people or enjoy by certain group of people that is decided that you believe needs to
[Guest]: be codified that deserves even codification of intellectual activity.
[Guest]: So you're actually designing cultural knowledge, you're actually defining what is knowledge
[Guest]: in culture and art.
[Guest]: So all this played a very important role in placing these art forms where they are, in
[Guest]: placing them in the fact that this is what we want to present as ourselves, without doubt.
[Guest]: And the fact that this did not happen for so many art forms, meant that for 70 years,
[Guest]: they are still considered just they considered, of course, exotic, very important, or you
[Guest]: say one thing, they are the source for this.
[Guest]: You know, I always find it deeply disturbing when classical musicians say, you know what
[Guest]: folk say, what do you mean by that?
[Guest]: It's like it was something that was an, you know, unpolished diamond that we took from
[Guest]: there and made it polished.
[Guest]: So those were like resource material.
[Guest]: And they have their beauty, they have their limitedness.
[Guest]: But then the classical is what is an evolution of them.
[Guest]: So all this allowed for this kind of cultural discourse to be entrenched in our psyche
[Guest]: and in our emotional beings, because we feel that way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and, you know, just thinking in terms of cultural equity, it just seems that the
[Amit Varma]: inequality in cultural equity was enormously exacerbated by these institutions, which just
[Amit Varma]: keep, you know, doing what they're doing, which is not to say that these forms of music
[Amit Varma]: should not have academies or, you know, theoretic development or whatever, but the other forms
[Guest]: are...
[Guest]: Definitely.
[Guest]: And you can point to so many forms across this country, you know, so I won't say I'm
[Guest]: not talking about what I would like to call, I don't like the word folk, social music,
[Guest]: for example, harvest songs or a lullaby.
[Guest]: Those are social music that is passed on from mother to daughter or, you know, all the villagers.
[Guest]: That's different from organized art.
[Guest]: And you've organized art across this country, and none of them had the benefit of being
[Guest]: codified or being given theorization or being written about in, you know, with the nuances
[Guest]: and the technicalities that they all have, simply because of where they belonged in society.
[Amit Varma]: So does that now, assuming that this started out as, I don't want to use the word equal,
[Amit Varma]: because we're not weighing different art forms, but assuming that at one time, they were all
[Amit Varma]: art forms at a similar level of evolution, have those kind of fallen back?
[Guest]: I mean, I'm uncomfortable about using this language itself.
[Guest]: I'm not sure.
[Guest]: Because of this codification process.
[Guest]: I wouldn't think so.
[Guest]: I would think that it's not an upper view, does not mean that it has not had its own
[Guest]: evolution.
[Guest]: It had its own changes.
[Guest]: You go to any of these art forms, and the practitioners will tell you how things have
[Guest]: changed.
[Amit Varma]: Narratives have changed.
[Amit Varma]: Storytelling has changed.
[Guest]: And maybe the absence of codification is a feature, not a bug.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And then that kind of takes it to a different kind of a journey.
[Guest]: It's definitely happened.
[Guest]: I think the fact that they seem to be invisible is what the problem is, that they don't exist
[Guest]: in serious discussion, you know, in all these highbrow.
[Guest]: So I think an important point that you're raising, and it's all important, is knowledge.
[Guest]: How does knowledge get created?
[Guest]: When is something knowledge and who is deciding these things, you know?
[Guest]: And what is documentation?
[Guest]: You know, it's very odd, no?
[Guest]: At one point, we keep saying Indian culture is not written culture.
[Guest]: Indian culture is what we carry forward.
[Guest]: But then we decide to only codify some of them.
[Guest]: We say both.
[Guest]: We say Indian culture is oral history, or we are an oral system.
[Guest]: We didn't believe in, you know, writing things down.
[Guest]: We celebrate that.
[Guest]: But when it comes to judging art or judging cultures, we give more importance to the ones
[Guest]: that have documents, that have some shastra, and that is not shastra.
[Guest]: So, you know, we play this little game, we choose when we want to be oral and oral, when
[Guest]: we want to be organized.
[Amit Varma]: And this reminds me of a similar privileging you mentioned in your book where you point
[Amit Varma]: out that documentaries about Chennai will always show Mylapore and, you know, those
[Guest]: areas from which you belong.
[Guest]: Of course I do.
[Amit Varma]: I'm from the innermost circles.
[Amit Varma]: You are from the innermost circles.
[Amit Varma]: We'll take a quick commercial break and then we shall come back to talk about Sebastian
[Amit Varma]: and Sons.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into products of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art like stoles and dresses for women and evening shirts for men.
[Amit Varma]: Home decor like wall plates, cushion covers and table linen.
[Amit Varma]: And accessories like tote bags and pencil pouches.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Dhruvi Acharya, Jaideep Mehrotra, Madhuri Kathe,
[Amit Varma]: Sameer Mondal, Brinda Miller, Tanmay Samanta, TM Aziz and Manisha Gehra Baswani.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting but even if you want to buy
[Amit Varma]: just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 15% discount, apply the code UNSEEN, U-N-S-E-E-N.
[Amit Varma]: That's UNSEEN for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with TM Krishna about Carnatic music and especially about his new book, Sebastian
[Amit Varma]: and Sons, which carries this delightful quote from C. Rajagopalachari.
[Amit Varma]: You talk about how, you know, Palgatmani Iyer goes to see Rajagopalachari with a problem
[Amit Varma]: about the contradiction that the instrument that he uses involves taking the lives of
[Amit Varma]: three animals because there are three kinds of hide on there.
[Amit Varma]: And Rajaji tells him, quote, don't look for the source of a river or the antecedents of
[Amit Varma]: a saint, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this seems to me to not only speak to the question of the Mridangam itself, but
[Amit Varma]: to all of Carnatic music.
[Amit Varma]: And you've actually, you know, you've done that.
[Amit Varma]: You've questioned the source of the river.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, in Tamil, it's like Rishi moolam nadhi moolam kekka kodathu.
[Guest]: I'm just telling you how it sounds in Tamil.
[Guest]: Rishi moolam nadhi moolam.
[Guest]: Nadhi is river.
[Guest]: So Rishi moolam nadhi moolam.
[Guest]: Never ask for that.
[Guest]: You know, when I first, it was told to me, this story was told to me, it seemed very
[Guest]: normal to me.
[Guest]: It's like certain questions don't ask, you know, why do you want to know?
[Guest]: But then when I looked at it again and again, this is like, wow, that's so convenient.
[Guest]: We decide what we don't want to see.
[Guest]: That's a rationalization of denial.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Entirely denial that, you know, cow skin is required for the Mridangam.
[Guest]: And I find Palagatmaneer most interesting here.
[Guest]: He said I wouldn't brush it under the carpet, right?
[Guest]: He could have very easily said, I don't want to talk about this.
[Guest]: But he's this man who loves the Mridangam.
[Guest]: He's obsessed with it.
[Guest]: He's really obsessed with it.
[Guest]: And he wants to get the best tone.
[Guest]: He wants the best skin.
[Guest]: He's very clear.
[Guest]: He wants to improve the tone.
[Guest]: He's trying his best.
[Guest]: And then it suddenly hits him like, wow, but isn't this the cow that I worship, but I want
[Guest]: the skin.
[Guest]: So he kind of, you can see.
[Guest]: So he's then asking, he wants, he wants reconciliation.
[Guest]: He wants somehow to make sure that he feels better about it.
[Guest]: And we all do that, right?
[Guest]: And he goes and asks Rajaji and Srirajagopalachari comes up with his answer.
[Guest]: And to me, his answer is more problematic than Maneer's seeking.
[Guest]: Maneer's seeking is very honest.
[Guest]: But Srirajagopalachari isn't, he's saying don't ask this because he's almost saying,
[Guest]: if you go there, you won't be at in peace.
[Guest]: You won't be able to do what you're great at.
[Guest]: You won't be able to play the Mridangam and be this incredible musician because you know,
[Guest]: you'll have to see things that you should not be seeing.
[Guest]: So that means you forget the maker, you forget the person who's cutting the skin out, you
[Guest]: forget the person who's cleaning their skin for you.
[Guest]: So you're actually removing a whole section of people and culture from the conversation,
[Guest]: but just saying, I don't, I know what lies behind it.
[Guest]: He's not blind to it.
[Guest]: He knows what happens, but I don't want to see it.
[Amit Varma]: So basically Palgat Maneer accepted Rajaji's advice, but you did not.
[Guest]: Of course.
[Amit Varma]: I took great offense.
[Amit Varma]: This reminds me of this old story about Tolstoy that Tolstoy once he became a vegetarian and
[Amit Varma]: he was very, you know, rigid about his vegetarianism and an aunt came to visit one day and the
[Amit Varma]: aunt said, I would really like to eat some chicken and Tolstoy was unhappy, but he couldn't
[Amit Varma]: say no to the aunt.
[Amit Varma]: So he said, okay.
[Amit Varma]: And then at dinnertime, the aunt gets to the dining table and she finds a live chicken
[Amit Varma]: on her chair.
[Amit Varma]: And Tolstoy said that none of us had the heart to carve it up.
[Amit Varma]: You do it yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And this reminds me of this beautiful bit I'm going to quote from your book about Palgat
[Amit Varma]: Maneer Iyer, who is, and this is in the context of Alkaton, who is Parilandu's cousin.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And quote, Iyer gave Alkaton a job.
[Amit Varma]: He said he wanted top draw cow skin, no compromises and the cost did not matter.
[Amit Varma]: Alkaton said it would cost rupees hundred.
[Amit Varma]: Iyer gave him that amount immediately in advance and headed out to a restaurant around three
[Amit Varma]: or 4pm.
[Amit Varma]: When he returned, he found Alkaton standing outside his house, cow in tow.
[Amit Varma]: Iyer was startled to say the least.
[Amit Varma]: Alkaton informed him that this cow had great skin, but the seller wanted rupees 120.
[Amit Varma]: So he wanted to check with Iyer before completing the transaction.
[Amit Varma]: Iyer was shocked.
[Amit Varma]: Almost certainly this would have been the first time he had to make a decision on the
[Amit Varma]: slaughtering itself and take responsibility for something that was thus far hidden.
[Amit Varma]: He just shooed Alkaton away and demanded that he take the cow with him.
[Amit Varma]: This incident from Iyer's life is a universal condition.
[Amit Varma]: I am certain that no Mridangam artist would like to be placed in a similar situation.
[Amit Varma]: Skin just drops down from the heavens as far as they are concerned.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: This is such a beautiful line.
[Amit Varma]: Skin just drops down from the heavens.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, thank you for that moment.
[Amit Varma]: We'll sort of come back to this later.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to especially delve into your chapter on how you went to an abattoir and enjoyed
[Amit Varma]: the experience.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm totally judging you on that.
[Amit Varma]: But first, tell me about how the thought of the book came to you.
[Guest]: You know, my first book was called Southern Music, a Carnatic Story.
[Guest]: And the book is a more academic book in that sense into technicalities, history, and in
[Guest]: a way, I think all the journey that I went through within music for myself, somehow got
[Guest]: encapsulated in the book.
[Guest]: And I actually think that the book that book helped me in gaining clarity with all the
[Guest]: different streams of thoughts I had.
[Guest]: So the book really helped me in, you know, figuring out what was happening through almost
[Guest]: six, seven years.
[Guest]: And there is a whole section on the sociology and the politics of the music.
[Guest]: And there's a whole chapter on caste.
[Guest]: And that chapter was very heavily debated when the book came out.
[Guest]: And I remember with my editor, we were looking at the second edition or something.
[Guest]: And I just flipping through that chapter, suddenly, the instrument maker came to my
[Amit Varma]: head and I said, and I'll interrupt you because you said editor and I'll point out I'm a big
[Amit Varma]: fan of your editor Ajita Jaya's fantastic job she did on that book and this one continue.
[Guest]: Thank you very much.
[Guest]: She's a fantastic editor.
[Guest]: That's true.
[Guest]: So what happened was, I suddenly realized I had said nothing about the instrument maker.
[Guest]: And I was like, what did I do?
[Guest]: In my head, music was only about the performance.
[Guest]: In my head, the instrument was got its life because of the instrumentalist.
[Guest]: What about the person who actually gives it the sound?
[Guest]: And that's when I said, what about the Mridangam maker?
[Guest]: And that's also because the Mridangam is slightly different from other instruments.
[Guest]: I mean, tabla is also close by.
[Guest]: The sense if I buy a tanpura, the tanpura stays with me and my connection with the maker
[Guest]: is lost.
[Guest]: I can retune it, I can change the strings, unless something gets damaged.
[Guest]: The tanpura then is just with me.
[Guest]: So there is no constant relationship.
[Guest]: It's not the case with the Mridangam.
[Guest]: The Mridangam needs constant change.
[Guest]: It needs skin change.
[Guest]: It needs that black spot to be changed.
[Guest]: So all the Mridangam makers, I mean, players will come and say, you know, this is old,
[Guest]: I need to go back.
[Guest]: And they're constantly at the Mridangam shop.
[Guest]: You've heard stories about what happens in Mridangam shop.
[Guest]: So I know all this folklore.
[Guest]: So I said, what about them?
[Guest]: And Amit actually wrote a paragraph to plug in.
[Guest]: And, you know, you're writing this to save yourself, actually, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because you want to be politically correct.
[Amit Varma]: Plausible deniability.
[Guest]: I did not ignore it.
[Guest]: Yes, exactly.
[Guest]: And I think I, I stopped.
[Guest]: And I stopped because I realized that it was fake and I realized I've been completely dishonest.
[Guest]: I also realized I knew nothing about them.
[Guest]: I knew nothing.
[Guest]: I mean, I knew the names.
[Guest]: I knew Parlan's name.
[Guest]: That was one name people knew.
[Guest]: I knew a few of the stories that people have told me, but I didn't know anything.
[Guest]: So I paused and I said, maybe I should learn about them.
[Guest]: Maybe there is a story, there are stories to tell.
[Guest]: That's when I first started going and interviewing Mridangam makers.
[Guest]: And I did this for about three and a half years.
[Guest]: I met, I don't know how many of them, I mean, the book comes out of about close to 50 interviews.
[Guest]: 30 of them are long, one and a half hour interviews, and then short conversations.
[Guest]: And I just kept interviewing people, makers of different generation, different parts of
[Guest]: South India.
[Guest]: I also spoke to Mridangam players.
[Guest]: And it was that whole journey.
[Guest]: And then sitting with them, honestly, I remember there were points in the interview stage,
[Guest]: the fieldwork stage, when I was overwhelmed by all the stuff I was hearing.
[Guest]: I was like, how am I going to even say this?
[Guest]: I mean, how am I going to tell this story?
[Guest]: There are so many streams, there are so many voices, is it even possible to say this?
[Guest]: And then it took me a long time to just sit with the interviews, watch them again and
[Guest]: again, look at the transcripts.
[Guest]: And then from there evolved.
[Guest]: So you actually recorded those?
[Guest]: I actually videoed almost every interview, along with audio.
[Amit Varma]: And I did.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I find you extraordinarily, and I'm jealous of this because I wish I had
[Amit Varma]: that quality, extremely self-aware.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, you know, when it comes to these interviews that you're doing, you are talking
[Amit Varma]: essentially to lower class Mridangam makers, who have essentially played a secondary role
[Amit Varma]: to the people who actually play the Mridangam, who are upper caste people.
[Amit Varma]: And there is, in what you are doing itself, an echo of that instrumentality, where you're
[Amit Varma]: using these lower caste people for your own purposes of writing this book, and you are
[Amit Varma]: an upper caste man yourself, which is clearly something you must have pondered.
[Amit Varma]: How did you sort of negotiate that?
[Amit Varma]: And this is, you know, even outside of this caste angle, this is a question that nonfiction
[Amit Varma]: writers get all the time, that at the end of the day, you might feel tremendous empathy
[Amit Varma]: with the people you're writing about, you might even be friends with them.
[Amit Varma]: But there is a sense that you're using them.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess the standard answer is that, look, I am being very upfront and honest about what
[Amit Varma]: I am doing.
[Amit Varma]: And they are responding to that.
[Amit Varma]: And then what happens is happens.
[Guest]: I don't think it's as simple as that.
[Guest]: I think it's, it's very problematic.
[Guest]: I've struggled with it.
[Guest]: Because I didn't know at what point, I mean, these are these are people.
[Guest]: And these are their lives.
[Guest]: These are their realities.
[Guest]: These are the stories they've experienced have been told.
[Guest]: It's about family, it's about history.
[Guest]: I mean, it's, I mean, it's not just information they're giving you, they're sharing themselves
[Guest]: with you, right?
[Guest]: So it really matters.
[Guest]: And the big problem is that you come from such privilege.
[Guest]: And you know, you can't treat them as some resource material, they're not resource material.
[Guest]: I mean, it's like if somebody came and asked me about my life, I mean, I'm opening myself
[Guest]: to you, right?
[Guest]: And I'm, you know, I'm asking difficult questions.
[Guest]: So, for example, I mean, I've never done any work like this before.
[Guest]: My writing has always been in a way in the more ideational observation and ideational
[Guest]: sense.
[Guest]: I have not done work where I was speaking to people and what they told me is the story.
[Amit Varma]: You've done essays before, this was almost journalism.
[Guest]: Yeah, this is, it is very journalistic.
[Guest]: And in fact, all the journalists I know understand how difficult your job is.
[Guest]: So it was very different territory for me.
[Guest]: I learned through the process.
[Guest]: I mean, what question crosses the line?
[Guest]: And I say it in the book at one point, I don't know.
[Guest]: I really don't know what line, what is that line, you know, when am I really pushing it
[Guest]: and I'm not being insensitive and not seeing that I'm able to ask that question only because
[Guest]: I'm privileged.
[Guest]: I mean, I would not ask this question if not for that, I wouldn't, I wouldn't even think
[Guest]: about asking that question.
[Guest]: So I don't know what that line was.
[Guest]: And I don't know, I may have transgressed, I'm sure.
[Guest]: And but I was always aware of it, you know, I mean, you know, whenever I interview a maker,
[Guest]: does the maker feel confident enough about that conversation to express displeasure in
[Guest]: a question I asked, for example?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: Because that's very, you will probably tell me, you know, if I asked you a question that
[Guest]: cross line, you'll just take me off and say, boss, stop.
[Guest]: Because we're both of equal privilege.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So I can do that.
[Guest]: No, the maker is not going to do that.
[Guest]: The maker is going to look at me, TM Krishna, who is a great singer, I'm, like I said in
[Guest]: the book, it's, you know, when I was looking back at the materials, when it hits you, right?
[Guest]: The amount of respect I got by people who are like three times my age.
[Guest]: You know, automatically, I mean, just by my presence, I was considered to be somebody
[Guest]: who has to be respected, and somebody who has value.
[Amit Varma]: And is there a danger that they want to please you, so they want to tell you what they think
[Guest]: you want to hear?
[Guest]: So, yeah.
[Guest]: So that is where you build trust.
[Guest]: That is where it's very important.
[Guest]: You have to spend time.
[Guest]: There were interviews there where the trust came early, there were interviews where it
[Guest]: took a long time where you could ask questions that were personal.
[Guest]: So that completely depended on the relationship and the bond you were trying to make, however
[Guest]: temporary it is.
[Guest]: You know, I think the first thing was, does the person trust you, telling you all this,
[Guest]: you know, sometimes it took a long time, it took a long time to the person feel comfortable
[Guest]: to, you know, say these things, or, you know, I had to coax and ask these questions and
[Guest]: move.
[Guest]: Sometimes, sometimes they did not say to, there were interviews where they did not answer
[Guest]: difficult questions.
[Guest]: They were not willing to answer difficult questions, which is also fine.
[Guest]: That also happens, but it's still, it is, you asked me a question for which, honestly
[Guest]: speaking, there is, I don't know whether I did the right thing or the wrong thing.
[Guest]: That's your question.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I mean, I really don't know.
[Guest]: I, all I can say is that I remained absolutely truthful to what was said.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I also took care.
[Guest]: And that was the way I could respond to what you said is to, for example, change names
[Guest]: when I felt the court were very sensitive, though they never asked me to, like you said,
[Guest]: that even coming into the horizon, they could say that to me.
[Amit Varma]: They wouldn't even have realized how this sort of journalism works.
[Guest]: So I took the decision sometimes when I felt the courts were sensitive, that I changed
[Guest]: the names.
[Guest]: Those, I think those were ways by which I was also trying to say that this is not just
[Guest]: information.
[Guest]: This is not just people who are giving me something so that I could gloat for having
[Guest]: written this radical book that, you know, that says these things, but these are people.
[Guest]: These are real people.
[Guest]: They are leading lives.
[Guest]: And I need to respect that.
[Guest]: I need to, I need to remember that.
[Guest]: So I think that that was my way of, of remembering that, you know, when I wrote the book.
[Amit Varma]: And before we come to the book itself, a final question about the craft that, you know, your
[Amit Varma]: earlier books are essays.
[Amit Varma]: This is journalistic nonfiction in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: It's very accessible.
[Amit Varma]: And as is obvious from the parts I read out very well-written, I think my listeners get
[Amit Varma]: that and they should certainly buy the book.
[Amit Varma]: So when it came to craft, what kind of thought did you put into it?
[Amit Varma]: Who were your models?
[Amit Varma]: Like, were there books that you looked at and said, yeah, it should be like this or
[Guest]: none, none.
[Guest]: So I did read a lot, but I, I think there was one thing that I kept in mind is I wanted
[Guest]: to be as close to the language as possible.
[Guest]: How do you do that?
[Guest]: So for example, you know, I'll tell you why this, I felt sometime there could be a disconnection
[Guest]: between commentary and quoting, right?
[Guest]: So the quotes, many of them are in Tamil, right?
[Guest]: So you're then transcribing it and then you're translating.
[Guest]: How much can the English remain Tamil in its source, you know, I kept that in mind.
[Guest]: So it remains as close to the quote as possible because it's possible to change the word to
[Guest]: an extent where it almost transforms in its intonation, in its, in its messaging.
[Guest]: So that was there.
[Guest]: Then when I write commentary and commentary, I felt that there should be a connection between
[Guest]: my style of writing and the voices of the makers, because ultimately this book is about
[Guest]: the voice of the makers.
[Guest]: So the way I tell the story must also be part of the voice that is coming.
[Guest]: So I kept that in mind right through.
[Guest]: So the style of writing in this is entirely different from anything I've written, okay,
[Guest]: in terms of language usage, in terms of even vocabulary, it's very different.
[Guest]: And that was because I said it should sound as close to the voices that the book is of,
[Guest]: that is of the makers primarily, this is a book being told from the voice of the maker.
[Guest]: So that's those are the things I kept in mind, because I felt then there'll be fluidity in
[Guest]: reading.
[Guest]: If I remained a kind of an academic kind of a tone, then there's a disconnect between
[Amit Varma]: that and the voice of the maker, which is full of the book.
[Amit Varma]: So though I won't understand it for the Tamil listeners of the show, is there an illustration
[Amit Varma]: of that you can give about a translating decision that you took?
[Guest]: For example, somebody made some people, the one important thing decision is that we also
[Guest]: wanted to document the various words, technical words in Tamil itself.
[Guest]: So you have words like kottu tattu, vettu tattu, which are all completely technical
[Guest]: Tamil words.
[Guest]: And it was very important that they remain that way.
[Guest]: I give descriptions once in a while to remind the reader, but we wanted it that way, because
[Guest]: you wanted to feel what that vocabulary is.
[Guest]: I'll give you an example of something.
[Guest]: So many times, you know, you retain sounds and retain these expressions that are said.
[Guest]: Here is one from Varadhan.
[Guest]: So I'll start with a paragraph.
[Guest]: The most beautiful part of our conversation was the elegant simplicity with which he described
[Guest]: the music of artists.
[Guest]: M. Chandrasekhar violinist was set for Madurai Subbu.
[Guest]: Now was set for Madurai Subbu is very much from Tamil, that means they are a team together.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: We retain, I retained it because I wanted that sound.
[Guest]: So and it's then it's Varadhan's voice, right?
[Guest]: Otherwise it becomes my voice and Varadhan says basically, M. Chandrasekhar was set for
[Guest]: Madurai Subbu.
[Guest]: Rumba super.
[Guest]: Okay, that's a classic Tamil expression, rumba is of course Tamil.
[Guest]: At a concert in in Mettur, people just lifted him up.
[Guest]: He played so well.
[Guest]: Of Ramabhadran's playing technique, he said he provided the groove so beautifully, it
[Guest]: would come along like jile jile jile.
[Guest]: Now, all this was very important for the way I we took the courts and retained its Tamilness
[Guest]: to that extent.
[Guest]: And that was part of a decision that I made that it should remain close to the sound possible.
[Guest]: I remember there's some expression called sweet, I remember my editor Ajitha and I had
[Guest]: this huge discussion about this expression that Johnson or somebody says, there should
[Guest]: be this sweetness, the make something to this effect, I don't remember the point, but something
[Guest]: the fact that sweetness in sound or something like that, you know, which doesn't make any
[Guest]: sense.
[Guest]: But it's an expression of an idea, a feeling, right?
[Guest]: We retained all that as close as possible to the Tamil original as possible.
[Guest]: So that is a very important part.
[Guest]: So because when you're reading this book, you're not only reading the stories, but actually
[Guest]: immersing yourself in language, in the culture, in the way things are said, in the way things
[Guest]: are exchanged.
[Guest]: And that was very important for me.
[Amit Varma]: No, so I recently did an episode on translation, recorded an episode on the art of translation
[Amit Varma]: with Arunabha Sinha, who's done more than 50 Bengali novels, though it will broadcast
[Amit Varma]: after this one.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the interesting things I came across while researching for that was this quote
[Amit Varma]: by Richard Pevear, about translation being a dialogue between two languages.
[Amit Varma]: And what you just said about the example that so and so was set for so and so, you know,
[Amit Varma]: almost seems like you're modifying English as well.
[Guest]: So who knows, that could take off because it's a...
[Guest]: It's very important that we think in that in those terms, especially in India, and wherever
[Guest]: English is spoken, I think there are many kinds of, you know, this language snootiness
[Guest]: is also something we're all obsessed with.
[Guest]: I think there are different kinds of English, there are different, you know, even in whether
[Guest]: it's Kannada or Tamil, there are different kinds of Tamil, different kinds of Hindi,
[Guest]: there is a different forms of idea of English too.
[Guest]: And it's very closely connected with Malayalam or with Hindi or with Tamil and these terms
[Amit Varma]: that come into being.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a feature, not a bug, if you're, you know, taking some of that local flavor
[Guest]: and becoming something of your own.
[Guest]: Absolutely, absolutely.
[Guest]: That flexibility is what really makes language interesting.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: If not, you would not, language would die.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we have language Nazis saying that, you know, pre-poning is not a word and all
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: I'm saying everybody uses pre-poning.
[Guest]: My dad used to keep saying that, by the way, I used to say pre-poning, he used to say advanced.
[Amit Varma]: Pre-poning, one, it has become a word because so many people have used it and two, it's
[Guest]: a lovely word.
[Guest]: It works.
[Guest]: Yeah, it does work.
[Guest]: It means I like the word.
[Guest]: I'm sticking with pre-poning.
[Guest]: So by the way, that's another thing that I love creating words.
[Guest]: So sometimes I just land up just creating this word and then we'd have this, my editor
[Guest]: and I would say, what is this word you've used?
[Guest]: I said, no, I just created it.
[Amit Varma]: So that's I think part of the.
[Amit Varma]: And then what does your editor do?
[Guest]: It depends on the word.
[Guest]: And then we argue about it and if it's acceptable, we let it go.
[Guest]: Sometimes I know you just can't use it.
[Guest]: Give me an example of a neologism.
[Guest]: So I'll give you one from the older book, Syllabomelodic Identity.
[Guest]: Syllabomelodic Identity.
[Guest]: It comes from Southern music that is entirely my creation.
[Guest]: So when I said that language in music is not about the word, but it's about the syllable
[Guest]: and the movement of the syllable musically.
[Guest]: So I called it Syllabomelodic Identity.
[Amit Varma]: Quite beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: We'll have to sort of discuss that at a separate time.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of get to the book.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the first things that struck me because it's on page one, that's why it struck
[Amit Varma]: me, is your whole notion when you're talking about Nanganallur, you write, quote, Nanganallur
[Amit Varma]: is a congested urban village, more specifically a Brahman enclave within a village, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And then later you say, quote, I've always thought of Nanganallur as a poor man's mile
[Amit Varma]: apart, a cliched symbol of Brahmanism, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: But one theme that sort of comes up at times during your book is how geographical location
[Amit Varma]: and social location are so interlinked.
[Guest]: It's very important.
[Guest]: It's true of every city.
[Guest]: It's true of every place.
[Guest]: You know, we think that urbanization somehow dissolves all this.
[Guest]: We have this notion that in the village, it's more stark.
[Guest]: It is more stark.
[Guest]: There's no doubt that the lines are sharper and you can see it.
[Amit Varma]: I think urbanization helps, but nothing is a panacea.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: It helps in certain ways because transactions change and requirements change.
[Guest]: But if you look at any city, look at Mumbai, look at any other city, you will find these
[Guest]: multiple enclaves that are created, right?
[Guest]: You know, for example, who's going to live in South Bombay, you know, you know, all these
[Guest]: things, you know, where the South Indian population is.
[Guest]: So, you know, and so, you know, some people actually, my friends of mine said, how can
[Guest]: you start the book by saying you thought of it as a Brahman enclave?
[Guest]: They got upset.
[Guest]: I said, but that's exactly how I've seen it.
[Guest]: You see it that way too.
[Guest]: Because if you think of Nanganallur, it was a place where people who did not live in Mylapore,
[Guest]: which is a middle class Brahman enclave, moved to at some point of time.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like Bandra is to South Bombay.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, we all have it.
[Guest]: So it's very important for us to identify that within our city structures, within our,
[Guest]: you know, habitations, these, none of these habitations are accidental.
[Guest]: We're making these decisions because of so many reasons.
[Guest]: So we're looking for similar people.
[Guest]: So when I say similar people, what are we saying, we look at all these markers, we're
[Guest]: looking at caste, we're looking at school, we're looking at many things, who is going
[Guest]: to be my children's classmate in this school?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's not necessary, like we said earlier, that you're thinking of caste per se, but
[Guest]: it's what your comfort zone is.
[Guest]: And your comfort zone is designed by all these things.
[Guest]: I mean, I mean, you know, how many of how many people be comfortable to live in a gay
[Guest]: neighborhood?
[Guest]: You know, because they look at it and say, oh, I don't want to be here.
[Guest]: You may not even think that you processed it that way, but you are making these decisions.
[Guest]: And therefore cities themselves have these little little pockets that function in those
[Guest]: in those manners.
[Guest]: And that's why Nanganallur is a certain pocket.
[Guest]: Even within Mylapore and Alwarpet, there's a difference because there is certain money
[Guest]: involved and you see those distinctions coming in.
[Guest]: So all our habitations, all our city living is filled with these kind of, I had this huge
[Guest]: argument with a man from Kolkata about this, you know, Kolkata is not like that.
[Guest]: So I said, I'm going to put a wager on this one.
[Guest]: I don't know Kolkata.
[Guest]: He said, okay, he's promised to spend two months about it and get back to me.
[Guest]: I said, I'm sure you can draw these lines everywhere.
[Guest]: He did.
[Guest]: He's not yet got back.
[Guest]: I'm waiting.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, he's run away.
[Amit Varma]: I'm listening to this Kolkata person kindly bite the bullet.
[Amit Varma]: It will help society if you confess that you that you were wrong.
[Amit Varma]: No, but I got to tell you, I mean, although caste is not necessarily involved, there is
[Amit Varma]: more class and coolness, but I live on Johu-Varsova link road, which is basically next to Varsova
[Amit Varma]: and very far from Johu.
[Amit Varma]: But all my neighbors say, oh, we live in Upper Johu.
[Unknown]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: It's the same kind of absolutely shit that's going down there, though, in this case, it's
[Guest]: more.
[Guest]: We live in a place called Nilangare now in Chennai.
[Guest]: The road we live in is not the cool road, the next road.
[Guest]: So anybody I say Nilangare, oh, you live in Kashirena Drive.
[Guest]: I said, no, I don't live on Kashirena Drive.
[Guest]: I live in this little thing called Singaravelento street.
[Amit Varma]: Kashirena Drive sounds very nice.
[Amit Varma]: If you were living there, I would have visited you.
[Guest]: But now I'm not.
[Amit Varma]: No, you're not going to come to my place.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me, who are Sebastian and Svans?
[Guest]: Give me the background of this.
[Guest]: So Sebastian's, all these names have their Tamil equivalents, it's Sevityan.
[Guest]: And Sevityan seems to be from my research, the oldest full Mridangam maker I can trace.
[Guest]: So Sebastian's cousin Ratnam is somebody who is in the cover of the book.
[Guest]: He lived in Madurai.
[Guest]: He'd moved to Madurai when he was much younger.
[Guest]: But he identified and came to, told Sebastian and his father that, you know, you have so
[Guest]: many Mridangam players in Tanjavur, why are you making Tawals?
[Unknown]: This is 1910s, 1920s.
[Unknown]: This must be around that time.
[Guest]: See, other thing, you know, timeline's very difficult in oral stories.
[Guest]: You don't know exactly when you're trying to trace it.
[Guest]: So I'll place it around that time.
[Guest]: And he says, what are you guys doing with Tawal?
[Guest]: You guys have so many Mridangam players in Tanjavur.
[Guest]: In Tanjavur, you had a lot of Mridangam players because there was Harikatha happening, there
[Guest]: was Bharatanatyam, then called Sadir.
[Guest]: Sadir was happening.
[Guest]: And you also had concerts, Carnatic concerts happening.
[Guest]: So you had a lot of people playing the Mridangam.
[Guest]: So the market was there and he's saying, why are you not exploiting the market?
[Guest]: So Sebastian begins.
[Guest]: He begins first working with Tanjavur Vaidyanath Iyer.
[Guest]: And that's when the story, their family story begins.
[Guest]: And Sebastian's three sons turn out to be the most important three names in Mridangam
[Guest]: making.
[Guest]: Shengol, the oldest, probably, probably not the most skilled of the three.
[Guest]: Second is Parland.
[Guest]: So Parland's actual name is Fernandes.
[Guest]: And the third is Shetty, okay, whose name is Anthony.
[Amit Varma]: And the point to note is that, you know, there's a distinction, as you point out in your book,
[Amit Varma]: which people make between converted Christians and, you know, Christians from abroad.
[Amit Varma]: This sort of carries the implication that these are actually lower caste people who
[Amit Varma]: converted to Christians.
[Amit Varma]: So they're still lower caste.
[Guest]: It doesn't matter if they're Christians, right?
[Guest]: This remains.
[Guest]: That remains, that remains.
[Guest]: The notion that, like you said, they've become Christians does not change the, move them
[Guest]: away from the caste identity.
[Guest]: You can check out, but you can never leave.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And then in a way you're also saying that's why they're still there.
[Guest]: I mean, upper caste people are not going to convert.
[Guest]: Why should we convert?
[Guest]: You know?
[Guest]: So there's that whole narration that's going subconsciously in this.
[Guest]: So they've converted.
[Guest]: I mean, I tried, I mean, again, the whole notion that who's converted, who's not converted,
[Guest]: you know, we don't know.
[Guest]: So they've seemed to have embraced Christianity.
[Guest]: I would say early 20th century, I mean, late 19th century, maybe early 20th centuries when
[Guest]: they seem to have that period, they've embraced Christianity.
[Guest]: And this family lived in the street called Keerthikar Street, okay, and they still have
[Guest]: their homes there.
[Guest]: In Tanjavur.
[Guest]: And these three brothers start going to all these towns nearby, Kumbakonam, you know,
[Guest]: Myladurai, Tiruvannamalur, all these places and doing work.
[Guest]: And at the same time, you have this Vaidyanath Iyer, who becomes this great teacher.
[Guest]: And then you have the biggest superstar of Carnatic percussion, Palgat Maniyar, moving
[Guest]: to Tanjavur.
[Guest]: And why does he move?
[Guest]: Because the best makers are there.
[Guest]: And Paraland is there.
[Guest]: And then, because of such a huge stature that Maniyar has within the whole Carnatic imagination,
[Guest]: the makers that make for Maniyar automatically become those that everybody else seeks, because
[Guest]: they want that kind of sound.
[Guest]: So Maniyar's most powerful competitor was Palani Subramaniam Pillai.
[Guest]: And there is this tussle for makers between them, you know, and Palani is not a Brahmin.
[Guest]: So there is a tussle there between them, not only because of abilities, because of caste
[Guest]: differences, but there's also a tussle for getting the best maker for themselves.
[Guest]: So there is this multiple little competitions that are happening.
[Guest]: And from Paraland, if you see, in fact, that family tree is mind boggling.
[Guest]: Now there are about, I don't know how many makers in that family, I think 30 plus.
[Guest]: And that whole family is now in the business of making mridangams.
[Guest]: This is Tanjavur.
[Guest]: Then you have a tradition that is happening in Chennai, then Madras.
[Guest]: You have Telugu speaking people making Madras.
[Guest]: You also have a pretty old tradition in near Palakkad.
[Guest]: Then you have a tradition in Andhra.
[Guest]: So you have other pockets also.
[Guest]: But the major contribution and the influence comes from the Tanjavur tradition.
[Amit Varma]: And I found one story really entertaining and telling about how Mani Iyer wants a particular
[Unknown]: kind of sound on his left side, which Palani gets.
[Amit Varma]: But even though they have the same maker, which is Paraland, as you said, if I pronounced
[Amit Varma]: it correctly.
[Guest]: Throughout this episode, I have pronounced everything wrong.
[Guest]: Actually you have done a pretty decent job, by the way.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I have no bones about my bad pronunciation in every single language.
[Amit Varma]: That's what, you know, being half Bengali does.
[Amit Varma]: You pronounce everything wrong in every language.
[Amit Varma]: So tell us a story about that.
[Guest]: So that's a very interesting story.
[Guest]: This is a very famous story that has been told many times in the folklore.
[Guest]: And it's a very telling story, like you said, it's a very interesting story.
[Guest]: So basically the Mridangam has two sides.
[Guest]: The one that you see, if you just go on YouTube, click any Carnatic concert, you will see the
[Guest]: black spot on the right side.
[Guest]: That's the dominant side.
[Guest]: Then you have a bassy end like the Daga of the tabla, which on the left, which you don't
[Guest]: see.
[Guest]: So Palani was known for his, when Palani, by the way, is not his name, his name is Subramaniam
[Amit Varma]: Pillai.
[Amit Varma]: Palani is a place.
[Amit Varma]: Apologies.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So we all call him Palani.
[Guest]: No apologies.
[Guest]: We all call him Palani.
[Guest]: So that's a very, very South Indian thing.
[Guest]: We start talking, you know, we call Aryakudi.
[Guest]: Aryakudi, Ramanuja Yengar is his name.
[Guest]: Aryakudi is the place.
[Guest]: We start calling them by the place.
[Guest]: So Palani's left is like exquisite.
[Guest]: He gets this little, very interesting baritone kind of movement, kind of sound.
[Guest]: And he has a special technique also.
[Guest]: Now there is this battle between Maniyar and Palani.
[Guest]: Nobody can, I mean, they had, they were congenial with each other.
[Guest]: They were friends and they even shared diocese, but yet there is this little thing.
[Guest]: And but the sound of Palani's on this left, on the base side, Maniyar could never get.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So in that competition, Paraland is making mridangams for both these people.
[Guest]: So once Paraland has gone to Trichy, where Palani lived, done some work and come back.
[Guest]: So Maniyar doesn't stop.
[Guest]: He says, okay, what do you do there?
[Guest]: I did some couple of, I made a couple of mridangams for him.
[Guest]: What do you do special for him?
[Guest]: No, I just did what I do for you.
[Guest]: Really?
[Guest]: Are you sure?
[Guest]: Then he leaves it.
[Guest]: But he's like, he really wants to know.
[Guest]: He comes back and keeps bothering Paraland.
[Guest]: But I never get the sound on the left like he does.
[Guest]: You do something for him.
[Guest]: No, sir.
[Guest]: I do the same thing.
[Guest]: So this goes on and finally says, you have to make a mridangam for me so that the left
[Guest]: sound is as good as Palani's left sound.
[Guest]: So this man does it once, does it twice, does it thrice, every time Maniyar comes and says,
[Guest]: this is not it.
[Guest]: It's not, I'm not getting the same effect that he gets.
[Guest]: Finally, Maniyar is off to some city for a concert.
[Guest]: So Paraland tells him, you go and come, sir.
[Guest]: By the time you come, I will get it organized for you.
[Guest]: I will get special skin also for it.
[Guest]: He comes back.
[Guest]: He's testing all mridangams.
[Guest]: He says, where is that mridangam?
[Guest]: The family were telling me soon that mridangam started, they start calling the mridangam
[Guest]: itself Palani mridangam.
[Guest]: So it's interesting.
[Guest]: So he comes back and then he tests that one.
[Guest]: He says, no.
[Guest]: I think by this time, Paraland has had enough of it, right?
[Guest]: So he turns around and says, sir, I will say something you should not misunderstand.
[Guest]: He says, what?
[Guest]: He says, that sound is in his hand, not in the skin.
[Guest]: So Maniyar is shocked.
[Guest]: So I can't imagine anybody who would probably tell Maniyar this, right?
[Guest]: Because he's this huge figure.
[Guest]: Maniyar is like, you're telling me that I'll never get this sound all my life?
[Guest]: That's in his hand.
[Guest]: So in Tamil, the word is kai vaag, okay?
[Guest]: We say it also for cooking, right?
[Guest]: When people, you make the same dish, somebody, somebody have is in the hair or green fingers.
[Guest]: It's very similar to that.
[Guest]: So he says that sound is in Palani's hand.
[Guest]: So almost Maniyar gives up.
[Guest]: But what's interesting is, is that this is a story that has been retold many times.
[Guest]: And that also tells you about that relationship between Maniyar and Palani, which is actually
[Amit Varma]: very unusual.
[Guest]: It's like an outlier, definitely unusual, which is why I found that relationship extremely
[Guest]: intriguing.
[Guest]: I wish Palani was alive.
[Guest]: I wish Maniyar was alive.
[Guest]: I could interview them separately and find out what there was because it's a complicated
[Guest]: relationship.
[Guest]: But in that relationship, there are these interesting what you could call transgressions
[Guest]: of norms in the way Palani could take liberties with Maniyar or in the care that Maniyar had
[Guest]: for him, not just because he was a great maker, but also because there was something there.
[Guest]: It's actually very, very beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: It's very beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating film to be made on this if someone is sort of interested.
[Amit Varma]: And you talk about how the relationship between the players and the makers is one of the term
[Amit Varma]: you use as paternalistic feudalism.
[Guest]: So kind of just elaborate on that a bit for me.
[Guest]: But that's that's the reality of Indian society.
[Guest]: This is not special of only of these two.
[Unknown]: It's true.
[Guest]: If the Indian society is a power equation, it's paternalistic feudalism.
[Guest]: So there is it's important for us to understand this because we also engage in it every time.
[Guest]: Every time we say that, you know, we are we look at our house, we take care of all the
[Guest]: people who come into domestic work, we pay for their education, we make sure that their
[Guest]: health care is taken care of.
[Guest]: You know, I grew up in this lady's arms as a child.
[Guest]: So she's like my mother.
[Guest]: She's like my mother.
[Guest]: So but just like if you just dig a little deeper, I mean, are these really equalizers?
[Guest]: I mean, does it make that relationship really like a friend or even like a friend?
[Guest]: It doesn't.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So there is feudalism allows for this possibility of care.
[Guest]: OK.
[Guest]: And but it never removes the feudalistic nature of it.
[Guest]: You're still the giver.
[Guest]: That individual is still the receiver that never goes away in a real friendship.
[Guest]: This doesn't exist between you and me.
[Guest]: If you wanted something, there's no conversation about it.
[Guest]: You don't want to ask.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: We just do it.
[Guest]: This is not how feudalism works.
[Guest]: So there is this paternalistic I need to take care of these people.
[Guest]: You know, I know what's good.
[Guest]: I know what's good.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: I know what's good for them.
[Guest]: I know that the children need education.
[Guest]: They have to be educated.
[Guest]: So we have to take care of it.
[Guest]: So I mean, there is a certain positivity to it, right, in some sense.
[Guest]: At the same time, it's very important that the power to make the decision is with you.
[Guest]: You are deciding what is good.
[Guest]: You are deciding that this is how it should be.
[Guest]: And the other person is constantly, subconsciously, sometimes overtly reminded that you are the
[Guest]: giver who's taking care of them.
[Guest]: There is always a feeling that if not for this individual, where would my son go?
[Guest]: Where would I be?
[Guest]: So this is the structure of paternalistic feudalism.
[Amit Varma]: And you give an example of this where, you know, different times in the book, you have
[Amit Varma]: a maker growing old and saying, I can't work anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, what will happen to me?
[Amit Varma]: And the advice given by the player is that let your sons come into the profession when
[Amit Varma]: the player's sons themselves have gone abroad and they're doctors and they're computer engineers.
[Amit Varma]: But to him, it's logical that the maker's son must be exactly and then there's no questioning
[Guest]: of that at all.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: You know, I took care of you, I'll take care of your son.
[Guest]: Just make sure that your son is also making Mridangams for me.
[Guest]: That continues the whole thing.
[Amit Varma]: It continues to this day.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: That idea still continues.
[Guest]: But I think the younger generation are very different.
[Guest]: Younger generation makers are also tougher.
[Guest]: And I think there is great affirmation and there is also aspiration.
[Guest]: So not many of them are going to really want to send their children in this profession.
[Guest]: I don't think so.
[Guest]: I know the older generation would hope that what I'm saying is wrong, because there is
[Guest]: that whole, whatever is said and done, this is our family.
[Guest]: That is also there.
[Guest]: That feeling is also there.
[Guest]: But I think the younger generation are not probably going to do that.
[Guest]: In fact, I've had one Mridangam player feel very bad that it's not going to happen.
[Guest]: They said, you know, if these people are all going to these IT companies, there's one quote,
[Guest]: one maker, one player told me that they would rather be a peon or a guard in an AC room
[Guest]: than do this work, though this work pays well.
[Amit Varma]: That's very interesting.
[Guest]: Where do you think that comes from?
[Amit Varma]: That's very, that is not just here.
[Amit Varma]: Is it striking out at the feudalism?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: No, this is said by the player.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: The player is upset.
[Guest]: The player is upset that the person would rather be, you know, a chowkidar, who's inside
[Guest]: this AC room or this peon than be a Mridangam maker, though Mridangam making has money.
[Guest]: Forgetting that there's so many other things involved in why they don't want to do this.
[Guest]: This is classic and this you find everywhere else.
[Guest]: People who say that, no, I don't find any agricultural labourers anymore.
[Guest]: They would rather go and work in an office.
[Guest]: You've heard many people say these things, right?
[Guest]: So it's the same mindset.
[Guest]: Again, it's feudalism.
[Guest]: It is, you know, it's the same kind of feudalism that is at play.
[Guest]: So they would rather have these people in control, take care of them, but make sure
[Guest]: they are there and any kind of mobility, which is seen by the individual as being far better.
[Guest]: Because it is not just about being the peon.
[Guest]: It's about respect.
[Guest]: You know, many people like to wear that uniform when they become a, you know, like the security
[Guest]: in a corporate office, there is dignity that is felt by the individual when they wear the
[Guest]: uniform and stand there.
[Guest]: You and I may not understand it, but then I'm happier if they are going to the abattoir,
[Guest]: making sure they get the skin, making sure they're standing under the sun for hours,
[Guest]: because I believe they make 2000 rupees more because of that.
[Guest]: You know, this is a very, very classic behaviour.
[Amit Varma]: And is it more possible today in your book you write about how at one time it was very
[Amit Varma]: difficult for a maker to be a player.
[Amit Varma]: No point even aspiring to that, you immediately knew that, oh, this is not going to happen
[Amit Varma]: and you reconcile with what you have.
[Amit Varma]: Is it more possible today with a more upwardly mobile aspirational generation?
[Guest]: I like to believe it is, but it's not so easy.
[Guest]: I mean, I know it's not.
[Amit Varma]: You still have the...
[Amit Varma]: It is very difficult.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not just about the maker, the caste entrenchment is there.
[Guest]: So it's not just because, not just as far as Mridangam makers, children are concerned,
[Guest]: I think it's true of people coming from multiple communities.
[Guest]: Very difficult to break through this, through the fiefdom, it's very hard.
[Guest]: But I'd like to believe that it will gradually change.
[Guest]: Already I know there are two, three people learning, whether they will become professional
[Guest]: players themselves, I don't know.
[Guest]: But maybe that itself is a transition, you know, that slowly in the next generation,
[Guest]: the next pedal will be pushed and then you have them as players.
[Guest]: But it's not easy.
[Guest]: It's not easy.
[Guest]: It is hard because still these structures are at play, you know, still these attitudes
[Guest]: are subconsciously there.
[Guest]: So does the teacher teach with the same intensity to the son of a Mridangam maker compared to
[Guest]: say my son?
[Guest]: That's a big question.
[Guest]: Even though the teacher is not consciously recognizing it, you know, probably not.
[Guest]: They presume that, you know, how much is this guy going to get, you know, enough for him,
[Guest]: this is enough for him.
[Guest]: Whereas TM Krishna's son, oh, this guy's, you know, a lot of talent will also get those
[Guest]: early opportunities.
[Guest]: And a lot of these things that you think of and who would have rather put on stage first,
[Guest]: you know, all these things are, are definitely operational.
[Guest]: So I don't know, it's going to be hard.
[Amit Varma]: That's very interesting, and I'm just thinking that game theoretically, even if every single
[Amit Varma]: person, every single person who's deciding a concert has a choice between, say, a lower
[Amit Varma]: caste new player and an upper caste new player, even if their individual instincts say take
[Amit Varma]: the lower caste guy, they will still not do it because they worry of what the others may
[Guest]: say and they might take the safer route.
[Guest]: And also, it's a very simple thing.
[Guest]: I give an example of names, you know, names give away identities.
[Guest]: So a lot of people who come from other non-brahminical communities have names that are very Tamil,
[Guest]: Arul Selvan, okay, whereas brahminical communities will be Mukund, Srinivas, TM Krishna.
[Guest]: So if I was given two names, I was given the name Mukund, Mukund somebody, and I was given
[Guest]: the name, you know, like I said, Arul, instinctively I look for Mukund.
[Guest]: It's just something I do like reflex, right?
[Guest]: And somehow I feel in the concert list, TM Krishna vocal, somebody else violin, Arul
[Guest]: Mridangam doesn't sound as cool as Mukund Mridangam, it sounds natural.
[Guest]: You know, so you are thinking of these things.
[Guest]: I mean, you're thinking of so many things, you're thinking of the way the person looks,
[Guest]: you're thinking whether the person will be able to speak in, if you're traveling abroad.
[Guest]: I mean, we all do this, we're traveling abroad, my colleagues, I'm thinking, can that colleague
[Guest]: speak English?
[Guest]: When we go to a dinner, we are thinking all these things.
[Guest]: It's not just about the stage, we're thinking of so many other things.
[Guest]: Culturally, will I be able to have conversations?
[Guest]: You know, will there be disconnect?
[Guest]: All this plays a role in these choices.
[Amit Varma]: Can we hang together?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Can we hang together is a very important part, community building.
[Guest]: So you want a similar kind of person with whom you can have a conversation.
[Guest]: Is it cool enough?
[Guest]: You said that's such an important idea.
[Guest]: So in all this, the person who's an, within quote, an outsider is in a hugely disadvantaged
[Guest]: position.
[Guest]: I mean, even women, for example, I've heard so many men say, you know, I don't want to
[Guest]: take a woman violinist because, you know, it's the kind of, you know, we'll all be hanging
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: So, you know, conversations cannot be free.
[Guest]: We're not even talking about talent.
[Amit Varma]: So basically, they want the freedom to make sexist jokes and stuff like that.
[Guest]: Exactly, exactly.
[Guest]: So you don't feel it's there, you know, it's easy enough, you know.
[Guest]: This is being said even for women, okay.
[Guest]: Or they will say, you know, we can just share rooms, but you know, with women, then it becomes
[Guest]: a little complicated.
[Guest]: All these ridiculous things I said, as far as gender is concerned.
[Guest]: So the same thing in different ways works here too, right?
[Amit Varma]: So this is how people are thinking.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you are thinking about how you are thinking, even if these instinctive thoughts come, you
[Amit Varma]: are correcting for them.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, how do you then do it?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you've then added this extra layer of consciousness to your decisions, right?
[Guest]: How does that work?
[Guest]: So some people think is I just have just complicated my own life, because they'll accuse you of
[Guest]: posturing or tokenism or not doing enough, or not doing enough.
[Guest]: People have asked me, you know, name people from other castes that you have on stage with
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: I'm not going to be naming people, it's their choice, you know, I'm not going to do that.
[Guest]: So I think that what I try to do is constantly be like you said, have that layer, make sure
[Guest]: that layer doesn't go away.
[Guest]: And I don't find it to be any way limiting my free flow of being, you know, because people
[Guest]: may think it just stops you from doing very easy thing.
[Guest]: No, actually, it helps me a lot.
[Guest]: It makes me see people I've never seen before, makes me spot talent that I would not notice,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Because I realized why I'm not spotted that talent, you know, or when I go somewhere and
[Guest]: listen to say this person is talented, you know, and so it allows me in fact, to take
[Guest]: a lot of the rubbish in front of my eyes and see things in a way that I would not see before.
[Guest]: If anything, it's helped me find many interesting artists, share non-stage time with people
[Guest]: who are very different and find ways in which you can connect and not limited by wanting
[Guest]: the similar kind of person.
[Guest]: So it has been extremely liberating.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll share with you, so this study comes to mind, which I read about in a book, I keep
[Amit Varma]: talking about brilliant book called super forecasting by Philip Tetlock, where he talks
[Amit Varma]: about this study, which showed that the most important factor in good decision making is
[Amit Varma]: not the things you would expect, like intelligence or education or whatever is diversity.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, that's and obviously, this is not about decision making, but do you feel
[Amit Varma]: that diversity, just ensuring diversity without necessarily compromising on whatever, but
[Amit Varma]: just ensuring diversity, sort of enhances the level of your thinking or the level of
[Guest]: your performance?
[Guest]: Definitely.
[Guest]: See, diversity is very important.
[Guest]: I think diversity also enhances the art form itself.
[Guest]: Any work, I mean, if I mean, take the work of journalism or take anything, you need diverse
[Guest]: people, diverse voices saying different things.
[Amit Varma]: Diverse points of view.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you need.
[Guest]: So even in music, you have different tonalities, different notions.
[Guest]: You need, for example, the Nadaswaram, which is now not considered, not presented as mainstream
[Guest]: Carnatic music.
[Guest]: You need that voice to be amplified because you need that different sound to come in,
[Guest]: different notion of of Carnatic music or different notion of Khyal.
[Guest]: So the diversity is lacking entirely across Indian art forms to a large extent.
[Guest]: So the diversity brings different ways of even hearing the same Sa.
[Guest]: It could be simple.
[Guest]: So it is diversity linguistically, diversity geographically, diversity in caste, in gender,
[Guest]: in all this.
[Guest]: I mean, we need people from the trans community singing these art forms, you know, playing
[Guest]: these art forms.
[Guest]: We need more women playing Murudangam because we need less machismo in all these things.
[Guest]: It's all full of, you know, showing off, showing off.
[Guest]: We need we need a different idea.
[Guest]: So diversity is essential for any community building, which is truly open.
[Guest]: It also is essential for art, for any job, any any area of work to really be alive and
[Guest]: vibrant with ideas.
[Guest]: You want vibrancy of ideas.
[Guest]: You need diversity.
[Guest]: Otherwise, it's not going to happen.
[Guest]: You will be happy with what you're experiencing.
[Guest]: That's a different thing.
[Guest]: But you're not going to have contestation, you're going to have conflicting thoughts,
[Guest]: you're not going to have interesting bouts, you're not going to have different perceptions,
[Guest]: and you're not going to have any movement which is forward.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And comfort zones are inherently very restricting.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they are like straitjackets.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I want to move to a bunch of general questions, leaving the book aside.
[Amit Varma]: But first, I have to ask you about your visit to the abattoir which I found absolutely fascinating
[Amit Varma]: because you like, first of all, what really interested me is the intricate science and
[Amit Varma]: almost the knowledge of which can only come from lived experience of actually constructing
[Amit Varma]: the Mridangam and the different skins involved.
[Amit Varma]: Like you point out that, you know, there are three layers, it's cow, goat, cow, or buffalo,
[Amit Varma]: goat, buffalo, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And the cow layer is always a female who's had two kids, because then the skin is stretchable
[Amit Varma]: enough to just the right degree.
[Amit Varma]: And, and your, you know, description of how you went to the abattoir and the makers who
[Amit Varma]: were with you, what they looked for, how they chose what they chose was absolutely fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me about you, you know, you expected to go there and be disgusted and repelled
[Amit Varma]: and you weren't.
[Amit Varma]: I thought I'll puke.
[Guest]: And you didn't?
[Guest]: I didn't puke.
[Guest]: I really thought I would.
[Guest]: I was warned by all the, by the maker who took me, Suse Nath and said, are you sure
[Guest]: you want to come?
[Guest]: I don't think you'll survive.
[Guest]: And I expected myself to really find the place just difficult to handle.
[Guest]: I still, I'm not able to explain why I did not go through that experience.
[Guest]: You know, I'm able to kind of understand it and I try and place it in the book.
[Guest]: But how did that happen?
[Guest]: I think what was most intriguing was how there are so many reals in the world, right?
[Guest]: And we don't see so many of the realities in the reals.
[Guest]: And I entered a new real for me as an outsider, that this isn't everyday happening.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: You know, every day in the morning, you have this happening in the upper floor.
[Guest]: This is their old normal.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: The blood and the gore and the skin.
[Guest]: This is the normal.
[Guest]: And this is part of it.
[Guest]: You know, the meat is taken, like I, the Mridangam maker always told me that there's nothing
[Guest]: that goes waste here.
[Guest]: I told him that many times.
[Guest]: It's like from the skin to the meat, everything has, the bones, everything has some utility
[Guest]: somewhere.
[Guest]: So we don't waste anything.
[Guest]: I remember that, that stays with me, that whole point that nothing is thrown away.
[Guest]: You know, nothing is discarded as, you know, this is of no use.
[Guest]: And you go there, you sit there, you see them work, you see the conversation and you're
[Guest]: like, this is very normal.
[Guest]: This happens every day.
[Guest]: They're having a cup of tea, there is gooey stuff all over the place, there's blood everywhere.
[Guest]: But what does that mean?
[Guest]: I mean, what does that say of that?
[Guest]: I mean, can I pass judgment on that job?
[Guest]: Can I pass, you know, that is why it confused a lot of things.
[Guest]: You know, I know that, you know, animal activists may find this problematic and, you know, maybe
[Guest]: they may think that I'm being insensitive.
[Guest]: I don't know, but this is how I experienced it, that there was something that I, this
[Guest]: was something I couldn't judge.
[Guest]: There's something I couldn't be judgmental in, like you asked me about the old and the
[Guest]: new, the previous question you asked me about, are we judging money here, for example, from
[Guest]: this, these standards.
[Guest]: So am I judging the people there who do this every day from my standards of animal rights,
[Guest]: my notions of killing?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: But the fact is that there was something very real about it.
[Guest]: There was something, I'm going to use this word with great care when I'm going to use
[Guest]: it, there's something nonviolent about it.
[Guest]: I know this seems like a misplaced word when cows are being killed.
[Guest]: But I'm saying that because it was not an act of anger, there was no, there was no aggression.
[Amit Varma]: It's weird.
[Guest]: There's something very, very weird about it.
[Guest]: There's something, the way I experienced it is weird.
[Guest]: And they go, and I won't tell you that even now people say that, you know, that any skin
[Guest]: is taken.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: When a Mridangam maker wants a certain kind of skin, the maker informs a person inside
[Guest]: the abattoir who chooses a cow correctly for it.
[Guest]: It has to be skinned in a certain manner.
[Amit Varma]: So the cuts are not on the skin.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, there are no cuts on the skin.
[Amit Varma]: And you attempted this apparently.
[Guest]: I tried peeling out the flesh and it's, oh God, it's very hard to do.
[Guest]: And so there is great science, specificity, observation skills, and the way it's nailed,
[Guest]: it's stretched.
[Guest]: It's, it's something else.
[Guest]: And it's not easy and it's a very hard job.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I've always sort of complained about the hypocrisy of people who are vegetarians,
[Amit Varma]: but they wear leather belts or they'll carry purses and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And in this case, any vegetarian Brahmin who is enjoying Carnatic music is enjoying the
[Amit Varma]: sound of a Mridangam, which is put together with all this animal skin and all of this
[Amit Varma]: death and blood and gore and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the question is not to pass judgment on it and say that, okay, don't listen to the
[Amit Varma]: music.
[Amit Varma]: The question is just to, you know, at least don't be in denial.
[Guest]: This is what it is.
[Guest]: That's why I see, I have a problem with Rajagopalachari, exactly what you said, right?
[Guest]: This denial that, you know, you don't want to talk about this, this doesn't exist, but
[Guest]: you will say, oh, what Nada in that Mridangam artistry, oh, I enjoyed it.
[Guest]: But you realize that if that Nada came because cow skin was vibrating and it's in that resonance
[Guest]: that you're experiencing ecstasy, you're experiencing divinity.
[Guest]: Let's, let's juxtapose those words, notion of experiencing divinity from the skin of
[Guest]: a cow.
[Guest]: I mean, you have to accept that this is real.
[Guest]: You have to, there has to be some acknowledgement and also means it's not just acknowledgement
[Guest]: of that, acknowledgement of the people who make sure that that's possible for you, acknowledgement
[Amit Varma]: of the makers.
[Guest]: Because someone else is going out there and skinning that cow, it's not you.
[Guest]: You know, I don't want to sound like I was, you know, just as you were speaking, I'm insensitive
[Guest]: to, you know, animals or insensitive to animal rights, no.
[Guest]: But I just want to say it's far more complicated in experience than we think it is.
[Guest]: You know, I don't know.
[Guest]: I mean, it's very, very complicated.
[Guest]: You know, like I was saying, a villager rears a goat, loves the goat.
[Guest]: Any agriculturalist will tell you this.
[Guest]: They'll rear the goats, they love the goat, take it every day out to graze, bring it back.
[Guest]: They can drink the milk and then they send it out to be killed.
[Guest]: Now, was there love for the goat?
[Guest]: Of course.
[Guest]: Was there a relationship with the goat?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So are they heartless human beings because they sent it to the abattoir?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: So how does this work?
[Guest]: I think we need this nuance when we are dealing with these things, you know.
[Guest]: Otherwise, there is this, again, evil, good, correct, wrong, you know, judgments that we
[Guest]: throw.
[Guest]: So I think we need to be far more careful with these things.
[Guest]: And that's what that experience taught me.
[Guest]: You know, that experience taught me that even in an act of killing, there is nuance in some
[Guest]: weird way, you know.
[Guest]: I'm not encouraging violence.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that we should be killing each other.
[Guest]: But I'm trying to say that there is this complexity.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there's an acceptance that this is the way things are.
[Amit Varma]: Even if you're not skinning cows, we are killing tiny beings all the time.
[Guest]: Like you said, we are consuming things, we are consuming belts and shoes and, you know.
[Guest]: And we ourselves are colonized by bacteria, so lest you think you are better than a cow.
[Guest]: And sanyasis sat on deer skin or tiger skin and spoke about nonviolence and about love
[Guest]: and affection.
[Amit Varma]: Now, that's very interesting, isn't it?
[Amit Varma]: I'm reminded of Talib's turkey.
[Amit Varma]: So Nassim Nicholas Talib tells a story of a turkey where a turkey wakes up one day and
[Amit Varma]: it has a really good day.
[Amit Varma]: It's taken out, it's given a lot of grain, it has its time in the sun.
[Amit Varma]: And then it assumes, okay, tomorrow will be like this.
[Amit Varma]: And lo and behold, tomorrow is like that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like that for 364 days in a row and is completely chilling.
[Amit Varma]: And the 365th day is Christmas.
[Guest]: So, yeah, so I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I think your book is something that listeners of the show are definitely
[Amit Varma]: should pick up and I'll kind of recommend that I want to move on to some bigger questions
[Amit Varma]: because I've taken more than two hours of your time in.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of move on now.
[Amit Varma]: One thing that you've, you know, written about in some of your essays is I see disparaging
[Amit Varma]: mentions of the market and I get where that's coming from.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the way I see it is that I really object to people who classify state, society and
[Amit Varma]: market as three separate things.
[Amit Varma]: I think there are two separate things.
[Amit Varma]: And the market and society, I mean, the markets are the mechanism by which society fulfills
[Amit Varma]: its own needs.
[Amit Varma]: And where markets seem misogynist and patriarchal and rambunistic is whatever if, is if those
[Amit Varma]: are the people who can really afford to buy things and who are sort of controlling it.
[Amit Varma]: But I think what we've seen in recent times, and I was chatting with you over lunch about
[Amit Varma]: this is, for example, there is TikTok and you could say there is even YouTube and various
[Amit Varma]: other means by which and ironically, Gio has played a part in this by making bandwidth
[Amit Varma]: so cheap that by which you suddenly have different classes of people possessing both the means
[Amit Varma]: of production and the means of distribution, which they did not earlier, the means of production
[Amit Varma]: did come a while ago, but and the means of distribution, which is why I find some tremendous
[Amit Varma]: cutting edge art on TikTok if people look for it, which is far removed from the art,
[Amit Varma]: for example, produced by Bollywood elites and so on.
[Guest]: So do you think there is something to this?
[Guest]: So I mean, I think my criticism of the market is to presume that the market by itself is
[Guest]: a solution.
[Guest]: That's my problem, because there is this belief that the capitalist market kind of levels
[Guest]: everything.
[Guest]: And I think my criticism comes from that belief system that somehow that the capitalist market
[Guest]: structure is going to like solve all these issues because everybody has access, which
[Guest]: is just bull.
[Guest]: You know, like you said, it only functions how society functions.
[Guest]: That's my criticism.
[Guest]: My criticism being that the market is only going to reflect what society is.
[Guest]: It's not going to do anything.
[Guest]: So unless you ask, allow society to ask those questions, the market will not transform.
[Amit Varma]: That's my point.
[Amit Varma]: So I agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll say that's a criticism of society, not markets.
[Guest]: No, but the market is just a part of society, I mean, you can't separate it from society
[Guest]: at all.
[Guest]: It behaves because market is constructed by people.
[Guest]: So therefore, social construction itself is a market, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because everything is being consumed, all everything is being produced and everything
[Amit Varma]: is being used.
[Amit Varma]: I'd say all voluntary interactions are part of the market.
[Guest]: So you and I speaking, this is in a sense a market interaction.
[Guest]: This is exactly.
[Guest]: So that's my point.
[Guest]: But to your point of the subversion that happens, that's also always true of most market structures.
[Guest]: When something is pushed in a certain manner, you always find through history, you'll always
[Guest]: find the counter voices, subversive voice, finding an opening that allows to ask that
[Guest]: difficult question, which is why you had incredible subversive voice right through history, irrespective
[Guest]: of which part of the world you're talking about.
[Guest]: Now, TikTok, I'm not exposed as much to TikTok as you are, but I can see TikTok as being
[Guest]: another example of that.
[Guest]: Now, here we go to the idea of technology also, especially in our times.
[Guest]: So my criticism of that is, again, comes from this notion that technology by itself will
[Guest]: do something.
[Guest]: I think TikTok is an example that you have a robust part of society that is willing to
[Guest]: ask these difficult questions, which actually is a good sign for any society.
[Guest]: And now technology enables that as a possibility to give it visibility and to be a counterpoint
[Guest]: to what is being consumed by most of us.
[Guest]: I see it like that kind of interaction.
[Guest]: I think it's a very important interaction.
[Guest]: And I think that that's where technology can help.
[Guest]: But for example, people believe that YouTube is going to democratize art, rubbish.
[Guest]: It's not going to democratize art.
[Guest]: So you need a counter movement, which is going to allow to push that to happen.
[Guest]: And that comes from these conversations that we are having.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll, I'll, I'll just say that we are actually in complete agreement.
[Unknown]: We are phrasing it slightly differently.
[Amit Varma]: I do not at all mean that markets are a panacea.
[Amit Varma]: Of course they're not.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I will be completely with you and say that markets will just reflect what society
[Amit Varma]: is.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, in different interesting ways, especially through technology, like
[Amit Varma]: I've actually said that in these difficult political times, I believe that technology
[Amit Varma]: is a one thing that could surprise us by empowering individuals in ways that the state cannot.
[Guest]: But Amit, you always had something that surprises you.
[Guest]: But it's not a panacea.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that.
[Amit Varma]: You're addressing it as if...
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm just saying that, you know, now it's technology, right?
[Guest]: And technology is just a medium.
[Guest]: Technology could mean so many things.
[Guest]: So people who wrote, for example, texts in the early 19th century, women who wrote very
[Amit Varma]: sensuous texts that were banned at that point in time.
[Amit Varma]: Those weren't technology.
[Unknown]: I mean, that's what I'm saying.
[Unknown]: That's a different...
[Guest]: So I'm saying those, the medium of technology is always being used, I think through history,
[Guest]: to challenge these structures.
[Guest]: The problem happens is when, if the dominant power, societal power, becomes so powerful
[Guest]: that it's not going to... suppose we ban TikTok in this country, or we ban the internet.
[Amit Varma]: Suppose I'm in China, for example, I can't even Google search.
[Amit Varma]: I don't dispute the coercive power of the state.
[Amit Varma]: But to use an example that you yourself have brought up in your writing, that if you look
[Amit Varma]: at the USA, what has happened over the last century, that first jazz and then hip hop
[Amit Varma]: have become dominant cultural forms, and classical music is basically dying, opera is dying in
[Amit Varma]: Mainland England.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, those elite forms are dying because of the reach of mass media.
[Guest]: But I don't think they will die.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I mean, and the reason for that is because of where they're placed.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Guest]: And they shouldn't die.
[Guest]: Every form should survive.
[Guest]: That's a different thing.
[Guest]: Whether they should or should not die is a different thing.
[Guest]: But I think they will not die fundamentally, because they still occupy the same space.
[Guest]: The numbers...
[Amit Varma]: But the dominance of jazz and hip hop still speaks to a lot, and that is the success of
[Amit Varma]: the market and technology.
[Guest]: Without a doubt, it speaks to a lot, but it also speaks to the fact that even now aspirational
[Guest]: culture remains with classical.
[Guest]: It remains with that niche.
[Guest]: The niche may be only 25,000, but it's still aspirational.
[Guest]: And the question is, for me is, while something like hip hop dominates imagination, mass imagination,
[Guest]: how can hip hop also dominate, or shall we say challenged very, very frontally, the notions
[Guest]: of the niche, because the niche still control these kinds of systems of what is accepted.
[Amit Varma]: I, you know, I totally agree with you in terms of the sort of cultural domination of certain
[Amit Varma]: elites and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But I think if there is going to be a fight back from counterculture, as it has been in
[Amit Varma]: the past, then it will happen through markets and technology.
[Amit Varma]: But I think we're broadly in agreement, just saying in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: The other question that I want to move on, which we discussed during lunch, at which
[Amit Varma]: point we were in agreement.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know what now, no, but is essentially about, you know, moving away for a moment
[Amit Varma]: from music and your sort of insights on music and the structures around music and moving
[Amit Varma]: on to what's happening around us in this country and the crisis of liberalism, so to say, is
[Amit Varma]: that one of the debates between Ambedkar and Gandhi on caste, and I'm mostly on the side
[Amit Varma]: of Ambedkar, but I think Gandhi had one valid point.
[Amit Varma]: And Ambedkar's point was that we have to reform society from the top down, sort of echoing
[Amit Varma]: what Nehru also believed, while Gandhi and others believe that no, the change can only
[Amit Varma]: happen in the culture.
[Amit Varma]: Now, despite my other agreements with Ambedkar and my other disagreements with Gandhi, I
[Amit Varma]: think there is something to this in the sense that I think what has happened in India and
[Amit Varma]: tell me what you think about it, is that we had a liberal elite found this country with
[Amit Varma]: a relatively liberal constitution when society itself was illiberal.
[Amit Varma]: Society has remained illiberal, politics has caught up.
[Amit Varma]: And that is a great failure.
[Guest]: Is that something you'd agree with?
[Guest]: Well, more or less, yes, I mean, now in retrospect, this may be wrong to say now, but I don't
[Guest]: know whether we as a society were ready for the idea of India that we were given with
[Guest]: the constitution.
[Guest]: I don't know, because like you said, it was, it was a notional idea based on some, it was
[Guest]: a hope.
[Guest]: Actually, our constitution is hope, is like, can we with its limitations, whatever it is,
[Guest]: that can we be like this, but what it does not consider, and what it does not, the people
[Guest]: do not consider is unless there is ground level actual work with the multiple culture
[Guest]: structures that are there in society, which are the complete antithesis of what we hope
[Guest]: to be, we are never going to get there.
[Guest]: If anything, things will get worse, which is a big liberal failure, in my opinion, because
[Guest]: you have this notion, limited notions, whatever they are, of equality, of, you know, of equity,
[Guest]: all these notions.
[Guest]: But how is it going to really happen in society unless children, schools, culture systems,
[Guest]: art forms are actually engaging in that manner?
[Guest]: I mean, even elite private schools, where did we ever speak about equality?
[Guest]: Where did we ever speak about rights?
[Guest]: You know, we don't have a notion of rights in this country, we don't have what it means.
[Guest]: We believe it's favorism, we believe that we should be always grateful to somebody who
[Guest]: has done what they should be doing.
[Guest]: So there is a complete gap between this hope, and the fact is that we never actually worked
[Guest]: for it.
[Guest]: So as a society, we were not ready for any of this, because this was not part of our
[Guest]: culture conversations.
[Guest]: This is not part of the fact that this is the India that we're hoping for.
[Guest]: There is a top down model.
[Guest]: And people, this doesn't mean the people on top actually completely agree to this model,
[Guest]: we should also remember that, that the elite who put this structure, many of them in themselves
[Guest]: were like feudal lords.
[Guest]: So they wanted this notion of India, but they were not like that.
[Guest]: So there is this multiple contradictions in the at the level of the constructors at the
[Guest]: level of social structures, and right through our independent history, we have never addressed
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I'll give you one example.
[Guest]: Look at our education, private education system.
[Guest]: I mean, we expect I, you know, my children go to private school.
[Guest]: So I expect my daughter, who studied 12 years in a private school, with similar kind of
[Guest]: people, with same kind of ideas, to suddenly come go to the new world in college, and understand
[Guest]: what equality is.
[Guest]: This is utter rubbish.
[Guest]: You're creating an education system that is fundamentally discriminatory.
[Guest]: We know who are the people going to public schools, we know who are the people going
[Guest]: to private schools.
[Guest]: Those who are aspiration want to move from public school to private school.
[Guest]: So you have not addressed a fundamental idea of even education.
[Guest]: So when you don't have a, don't build a culture, I mean, my daughter's not had shared meal
[Guest]: with people of diversity.
[Guest]: She is not.
[Guest]: So she's never going to understand what that is.
[Guest]: How is she ever going to understand equality?
[Guest]: You know, so we don't have a culture of equality, we don't have a culture of fraternity, we
[Guest]: have no culture of socialism.
[Guest]: So the interesting point is that unless there is cultural transformation in the way we behave,
[Guest]: in the way we see each other, this preamble of our constitution is never going to be a
[Guest]: reality, which is why the constitution itself has so many, so many problematic parts.
[Guest]: The preamble has this incredible set of lines, but there are multiple parts of the constitution
[Guest]: that are exactly a counterpoint to that.
[Guest]: How do we let that pass after 72 years, how do we have draconian laws?
[Guest]: How do we don't see that even in the liberal world, we've done nothing.
[Guest]: So let's not talk about X government or Y government, the socialist spirited government
[Guest]: of this country did not do anything.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because somewhere we are still feudalistic, somewhere we want that power.
[Guest]: We want to make sure you have freedom of expression, but we don't want it fully.
[Guest]: We want to draw that line and I want to decide where that line is.
[Guest]: So that's the problem we're in.
[Amit Varma]: So cultural transformation is essential for us if we want to move anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I recorded an episode with Madhav Khosla, author of the brilliant book, India's
[Amit Varma]: Founding Moment, which will air in, I think, three weeks time after you listen to this,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of talks about many of the decisions that I think our founders got wrong.
[Amit Varma]: For example, all the reasonable restrictions to our rights, which I think make some of
[Amit Varma]: those rights meaningless with the over centralization of the state, which they did for very interesting
[Amit Varma]: reasons.
[Amit Varma]: These weren't sort of, you know, automatic decisions, but you'll have to wait for that
[Amit Varma]: episode.
[Amit Varma]: I'm also, you know, reminded in this context of what Andrew Breitbart once said, where
[Amit Varma]: he said, politics is downstream of culture.
[Amit Varma]: You want politics to change, you change the culture first.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't go the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something I'd done an episode with Akshay Mukul on the Gita Press.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that is so demonstrated by what the Hindutva folks got absolutely
[Amit Varma]: right.
[Amit Varma]: In terms of strategy, in terms of tactics, they completely nailed it.
[Amit Varma]: Is it a sort of a fundamental problem of liberal elites like us, that we want a thousand flowers
[Amit Varma]: to flourish.
[Amit Varma]: So we can't, you know, put a program in place like the communist world or like the Hindutva
[Amit Varma]: guys did.
[Amit Varma]: There's no programmatic way of thinking because that's alien to us as it should be.
[Amit Varma]: We just want to let diversity flourish.
[Amit Varma]: But in the process, what happens is that we haven't been able to counter these dangerous
[Guest]: narratives.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I think they got it absolutely right.
[Guest]: When they realized that if you want to influence people, we influence their behavior and behavior
[Guest]: comes from cultural habituation.
[Guest]: So as long as we keep playing that and they had this very, very divisive, you can easily
[Guest]: manipulate these cultures and they manipulated it right through and now we are where we are.
[Guest]: So they got it right when they realized that culture is where you need to change.
[Guest]: Even the anger and the hate you see today is a result of years and decades and decades
[Guest]: and decades of actually playing around with those notions of cultures.
[Guest]: Now at the same time, we have this liberal world in India.
[Guest]: I think one of the, I believe, I know what I said, what I'm going to say is kind of difficult
[Guest]: and problematic is this inability of the liberal world to engage with faith and belief and
[Guest]: ritual and also propagate a certain condescension towards any of that.
[Guest]: Almost say that is not modern India.
[Guest]: Almost say that that is not the way we should be thinking now.
[Guest]: That is something of the old and that is, of course, it is intrinsically entrenched
[Guest]: in different discriminative things, but there is also something very real about it.
[Guest]: The fact that ritual, faith, belief is a fundamental human need and you need to respect it.
[Guest]: You need to engage with it.
[Guest]: Otherwise, what has happened and what the RSS has done very effectively is they've almost,
[Guest]: I mean the BJP and RSS is almost saying independent India is a fraud.
[Guest]: That whatever you had for 70 years is an evil.
[Guest]: It's almost against everything that Indianness is that civilizational India knew everything.
[Guest]: We were this people who loved each other.
[Guest]: We had no discrimination.
[Guest]: Women were goddesses.
[Guest]: Everything was correct.
[Guest]: And all that was destroyed by what the constitution of India without saying it, they're actually
[Guest]: saying that the constitution and the democratic idea of India is actually a destruction of
[Guest]: the idea of India.
[Guest]: And the reason they're able to see that effectively is because of the inability of the liberal
[Guest]: in the center, in the central left to engage with these very, very nuanced notions of faith.
[Guest]: Respect it because people of faith feel disrespected.
[Guest]: Let's be very honest here.
[Guest]: They do feel disrespected.
[Guest]: I know how problematic is what I'm saying.
[Guest]: Of course, you have to challenge notions.
[Guest]: You have to challenge patriarchy, you have to challenge caste, you have to challenge
[Guest]: gender, but we have to find a way by which we can find partnership there because otherwise
[Guest]: you're pushing more people towards being fanatical, you know, because now they're feeling threatened.
[Guest]: And like I said, Amit, how much of explanation can you actually give me when I feel threatened?
[Guest]: I believe it.
[Guest]: Then you lash out viscerally.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: I just believe it.
[Guest]: I believe I'm being cornered.
[Guest]: I believe I'm threatened.
[Guest]: You can say a lot.
[Guest]: This makes, there's no logic in this.
[Guest]: What are you talking about?
[Guest]: But it makes no sense.
[Amit Varma]: But this feeling is real.
[Amit Varma]: There are two conflicting impulses here.
[Amit Varma]: The first impulse is to say that, listen, we have to engage with the reality out there.
[Amit Varma]: So at a tactical level, to be able to win, we need to reclaim nationalism, like you've
[Amit Varma]: said and reclaim Hinduism, perhaps, as some have said, like I think that's Shashi Tharoor's
[Amit Varma]: whole point.
[Amit Varma]: But there's another way of looking at it, where somebody could say from conviction that
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to reclaim nationalism because nationalism by definition is exclusionary,
[Amit Varma]: but I don't want to reclaim Hinduism, even though it's better and different from Hindutva,
[Amit Varma]: but I don't want to reclaim it because I want to move past it because I want to move past
[Amit Varma]: caste and all these other things, which is part of the baggage of Hinduism.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a battle between first principles and beliefs you might come from and the tactics
[Amit Varma]: required to win the battle.
[Amit Varma]: And there is and I'm thinking aloud, so I'm sorry if I'm rambling, but it seems to me
[Amit Varma]: at some point that if you compromise on those core convictions for the sake of tactics,
[Guest]: you change until you're no longer like that.
[Guest]: I am not talking tactically.
[Guest]: I'm not talking about reclaiming Hinduism at all.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: You've spoken about reclaiming nationalism.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Two different things.
[Amit Varma]: I want to place them very different.
[Amit Varma]: I am not talking about reclaiming Hinduism.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: I wasn't referring to you.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm just saying, no, I'm saying those who say, I think, in fact, I disagree with
[Guest]: the notion of reclaiming Hinduism.
[Guest]: I disagree with Mr. Tharoor's position in that, because I think it's about, see, every discourse
[Guest]: has to move.
[Guest]: I don't believe Hinduism is some ideal discourse in whatever form that we want to reclaim.
[Guest]: It is not ideal.
[Guest]: Hinduism is discriminative.
[Guest]: Let's be very clear.
[Guest]: Islam is discriminative.
[Guest]: Christianity is discriminative.
[Guest]: So when we say we want to reclaim something, you're almost saying there was a point of
[Guest]: time when it was this perfect body.
[Guest]: Nonsense.
[Guest]: It was not.
[Guest]: No structure can be.
[Guest]: I am saying, can we find a way?
[Guest]: I don't know how.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Can we find a way by which we don't need to discard the feeling of hope and feeling of
[Guest]: security that people get from certain things?
[Guest]: It could be faith.
[Guest]: It could be religious.
[Guest]: It could be even ritual, which is not necessarily connected with faith.
[Guest]: Could we find a way to have that as a part of our democratic narrative?
[Guest]: Can that be part of the way we feel?
[Guest]: That's my intriguing question here.
[Guest]: How is it possible?
[Guest]: Can we, do we need new rituals, for example?
[Guest]: You know, because ritual is a very important part of how we live our life.
[Guest]: Do we need new imagination of faith?
[Guest]: We have to think in that manner, that there are certain things that people do and we do
[Guest]: that is part of who we are.
[Guest]: That may not essentially be discriminative.
[Guest]: Everything in the past is not that, but everything in the past is also not positive.
[Guest]: So it's not about reclaiming Hinduism.
[Guest]: It's not about reclaiming anything.
[Guest]: It's about finding a connection between cultural practices that are there across this country
[Guest]: and giving those cultural practices a democratic, modern space.
[Guest]: Because right now we don't want to give it space.
[Guest]: We are saying, oh, leave all that.
[Guest]: I don't think that works.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think that works.
[Amit Varma]: You know, coming from anyone else, I would just say those are just words, but coming
[Amit Varma]: from you, that's very credible because in a sense, that's what you're trying to do with
[Amit Varma]: Carnatic music and you know, not, you're not abandoning the form into something else.
[Guest]: Exactly the point.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So how do I complicate that?
[Guest]: You know, when you engage with different art forms, you let them communicate with each
[Guest]: other, talk to each other in some fashion.
[Guest]: It's a very uncomfortable conversation.
[Guest]: It's a, it's sometimes just doesn't work, but there is something interesting that form,
[Guest]: there is a reflection that happens, there is a seeing that happens.
[Guest]: That's why I feel art plays an important role in what I'm saying now.
[Guest]: Art forms.
[Guest]: And I'm not talking about, you know, another thing, this country, you know, the political
[Guest]: world has no sense of art.
[Guest]: The left thing, art is protests and slogans and plays and songs that is about propaganda.
[Guest]: These are we've been viewing, but no, I'm just talking about art forms that exist.
[Guest]: You know, they practice across this country.
[Guest]: How can they become part of this country?
[Guest]: Because I think that's where they can find ways in what I'm saying that you can't find
[Guest]: in any other place.
[Guest]: You know, how can we create places where these, you know, shall we say collaborate, or maybe
[Guest]: even contest each other, or maybe reach out to people that they don't reach out before.
[Guest]: Sometimes when you experience an art form from a community that you have no connection
[Guest]: with, just that experience changes the way you relate to the community.
[Guest]: There's so much possible.
[Guest]: But I feel discarding these practices as being archaic or as being being reductionist in
[Guest]: only a sociological sense without taking the experience as being an important part is problematic.
[Guest]: And I, I feel even more sure that in our present situation, it is essential that we do this.
[Guest]: Otherwise, we're going to just lose more, because you're not talking about it.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, you and I are almost the same age, and sometimes I have to remind myself
[Amit Varma]: that listen, 60% of the country is born after 1991.
[Amit Varma]: The average age is something like 27.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody's like, everybody's like a kid to me.
[Amit Varma]: And it's okay for me to feel this, you know, disconnected, because I'm a solitary animal
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But you actually travel around, you engage with young people, you perform everywhere,
[Amit Varma]: you speak everywhere, you know, you've been to Shaheen Bagh recently, you're part of all
[Amit Varma]: of this ferment that is happening, you've actively made yourself participant in all
[Amit Varma]: of this.
[Amit Varma]: What's your sense that is there hope to be had from this young generation coming up that
[Amit Varma]: on the one hand, we have a terrible jobs crisis, a terrible employment crisis, a lot of it
[Amit Varma]: feeds into these, you know, divisive narratives that are floating around.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you interact at an artistic level with a tremendous number of
[Amit Varma]: young people.
[Amit Varma]: What's the sense you get?
[Guest]: Or where this country is going?
[Guest]: Well, I don't know whether there can be a generality in that, but I do think that younger
[Guest]: people have definitely surprised me.
[Guest]: I would have thought some time ago that there's no energy there.
[Guest]: And I actually think it's our generation that has failed.
[Guest]: It's you and I, who I think really did not engage robustly with ourselves and with what
[Guest]: was around us, especially if comes from, you know, social capital and cultural capital.
[Guest]: And in a way, I think the younger generation is reminding us of what we should have been
[Guest]: doing.
[Guest]: So it's not just about the protests.
[Guest]: It's not just about the protests.
[Guest]: It's also in the way, you know, this whole idea of culture we discussed, I found the
[Guest]: most interesting conversations about that with young people.
[Guest]: Because when I talk about this, when I talk about the need to find these ways we can bridge
[Guest]: culture or old culture with the democratic idea of India, and I don't see it as necessarily
[Guest]: being an impossibility, they almost feel like, yeah, we're unable to connect.
[Guest]: Because however you are, wherever you are, I think there is this disconnection and they
[Guest]: feel that, for example, we don't have a language to counter that discourse.
[Guest]: We don't have a language to counter this, your anti-culture discourse, your anti-Indian
[Guest]: discourse.
[Guest]: We have a political point.
[Guest]: We have an intellectual way, but we don't have an emotional way to counter that.
[Guest]: And I think that's something I find the younger people willing to engage with.
[Guest]: I've had a couple of very interesting conversations with younger groups about this, you know,
[Guest]: and they have great ideas.
[Guest]: I think one important thing that I think young people have, which we need is imagination.
[Guest]: And that gives me the greatest hope, because I think if there's anything that is dead in
[Guest]: political India today, it's imagination.
[Guest]: Because all we have is rhetoric, reaction, followed by a cycle of rhetoric and reaction.
[Guest]: There is no imagination, there is no creativity, because unless there is creativity, there
[Guest]: can't be politics.
[Guest]: You're redundant.
[Guest]: You're a waste of time.
[Guest]: And that's why people are getting bored, especially of opposition politics, because everybody
[Guest]: is saying the same parroted thing again and again.
[Guest]: You and I can say it, you know?
[Guest]: So where is the imagination?
[Guest]: And I think the younger people in the way they protest and the creative ways in which
[Guest]: they're expressing themselves and saying things of great importance and profundity, in sometimes
[Guest]: just two words, in just an image, is magnificent.
[Guest]: But does that mean everything will change tomorrow?
[Guest]: Probably not.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe another generation.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Shame on you for saying that we were ending on such a nice note of hope and I was suddenly
[Amit Varma]: for the first time in months feeling good about the world and you've done that.
[Amit Varma]: I have like two more pages of questions, but we'll save it for another episode.
[Amit Varma]: I've taken up more than two and a half hours of your time.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for being so generous.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you very much.
[Amit Varma]: Pleasure to talk to you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do head on over to your nearest bookstore online or
[Amit Varma]: offline and pick up Sebastian and Sons.
[Amit Varma]: I'll also link TM's other books from the show notes as well as other relevant links.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow TM on Twitter at TM Krishna.
[Amit Varma]: That's one word.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: Check out their awesome public policy courses at takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.